GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 1
A
Abdominal aorta ultrasound see Abdominal While pelvic ultrasoundis widely known and com-
monly used for fetal monitoring during pregnancy,
ultrasound
ultrasound is also routinely used for general abdominal
Abdominal aortic aneurysm see Aortic imaging. It has great advantage over x-ray imaging tech-
aneurysm nologies in that it does not damage tissues with ionizing
radiation. Ultrasound is also generally far better than
Abdominal hernia see Hernia
plain x rays at distinguishing the subtle variations of soft
Abdominal thrust see Heimlich maneuver tissue structures, and can be used in any of several
modes,depending on the need at hand.
As an imaging tool,abdominal ultrasound generally
is warranted for patients afflicted with:chronic or acute
abdominal pain; abdominal trauma; an obvious or sus-
pected abdominal mass; symptoms of liver disease,pan-
Abdominal ultrasound creatic disease, gallstones, spleen disease, kidney dis-
ease and urinary blockage; or symptoms of an abdominal
Definition
aortic aneurysm. Specifically:
Ultrasound technology allows doctors to “see”
•Abdominal pain. Whether acute or chronic, pain can
inside a patient without resorting to surgery. A transmit-
signal a serious problem—from organ malfunction or
ter sends high frequency sound waves into the body,
injury to the presence of malignant growths. Ultrasound
where they bounce off the different tissues and organs to
scanning can help doctors quickly sort through poten-
produce a distinctive pattern of echoes. A receiver
tial causes when presented with general or ambiguous
“hears” the returning echo pattern and forwards it to a
symptoms. All of the major abdominal organs can be
computer,which translates the data into an image on a
studied for signs of disease that appear as changes in
television screen. Because ultrasound can distinguish
size,shape and internal structure.
subtle variations between soft,fluid-filled tissues,it is
particularly useful in providing diagnostic images of the •Abdominal trauma. After a serious accident,such as a
abdomen. Ultrasound can also be used in treatment. car crash or a fall, internal bleeding from injured
abdominal organs is often the most serious threat to
survival. Neither the injuries nor the bleeding are
Purpose immediately apparent. Ultrasound is very useful as an
initial scan when abdominal trauma is suspected,and it
The potential medical applications of ultrasound
can be used to pinpoint the location,cause,and severity
were first recognized in the 1940s as an outgrowth of the
of hemorrhaging. In the case of puncture wounds,from
sonar technology developed to detect submarines during
a bullet for example,ultrasound can locate the foreign
World War II. The first useful medical images were pro-
object and provide a preliminary survey of the damage.
duced in the early 1950s,and,by 1965,ultrasound quali-
The easy portability and versatility of ultrasound tech-
ty had improved to the point that it came into general
nology has brought it into common emergency room
medical use. Improvements in the technology,applica-
use,and even into limited ambulance service.
tion, and interpretation of ultrasound continue. Its low
cost,versatility,safety and speed have brought it into the •Abdominal mass. Abnormal growths—tumors, cysts,
top drawer of medical imaging techniques. abscesses, scar tissue and accessory organs—can be
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 1
located and tentatively identified with ultrasound. In they pass. These vibrations are mild,virtually unnotice-
particular, potentially malignant solid tumors can be able at the frequencies and intensities used for imaging.
distinguished from benign fluid-filled cysts and Properly focused however,high-intensity ultrasound can
abscesses. Masses and malformations in any organ or be used to heat and physically agitate targeted tissues.
part of the abdomen can be found. High-intensity ultrasound is used routinely to treat
•Liver disease. The types and underlying causes of liver soft tissue injuries,such as strains,tears and associated
disease are numerous, though jaundice tends to be a scarring. The heating and agitation are believed to pro-
general symptom. Ultrasound can differentiate between mote rapid healing through increased circulation. Strong-
many of the types and causes of liver malfunction,and ly focused,high-intensity,high-frequency ultrasound can
is particularly good at identifying obstruction of the also be used to physically destroy certain types of
bile ducts and cirrhosis, which is characterized by tumors,as well as gallstones and other types of calculi.
abnormal fibrous growths and reduced blood flow. Developing new treatment applications for ultrasound is
an active area of medical research.
•Pancreatic disease. Inflammation and malformation of
the pancreas are readily identified by ultrasound,as are
pancreatic stones (calculi), which can disrupt proper Precautions
functioning.
Properly performed,ultrasound imaging is virtually
•Gallstones. Gallstones cause more hospital admissions without risk or side effects. Some patients report feeling
than any other digestive malady. These calculi can a slight tingling and/or warmth while being scanned,but
cause painful inflammation of the gallbladder and also most feel nothing at all. Ultrasound waves of appropriate
obstruct the bile ducts that carry digestive enzymes frequency and intensity are not known to cause or aggra-
from the gallbladder and liver to the intestines. Gall- vate any medical condition, though any woman who
stones are readily identifiable with ultrasound. thinks she might be pregnant should raise the issue with
•Spleen disease. The spleen is particularly prone to her doctor before undergoing an abdominal ultrasound.
injury during abdominal trauma. It may also become The value of ultrasound imaging as a medical tool,
painfully inflamed when beset with infection or however,depends greatly on the quality of the equipment
cancer. These conditions also lend themselves well to used and the skill of the medical personnel operating it.
ultrasonic inspection and diagnosis. Improperly performed and/or interpreted,ultrasound can
•Kidney disease. The kidneys are also prone to traumatic be worse than useless if it indicates that a problem exists
injury and are the organs most likely to form calculi, where there is none,or fails to detect a significant condi-
which can block the flow of urine and cause blood poi- tion. Basic ultrasound equipment is relatively inexpen-
soning(uremia). A variety of diseases causing distinct sive to obtain, and any doctor with the equipment can
changes in kidney morphology can also lead to com- perform the procedure whether qualified or not. Patients
plete kidney failure. Ultrasound imaging has proven should not hesitate to verify the credentials of techni-
extremely useful in diagnosing kidney disorders. cians and doctors performing ultrasounds,as well as the
quality of the equipment used and the benefits of the pro-
•Abdominal aortic aneurysm. This is a bulging weak
posed procedure.
spot in the abdominal aorta, which supplies blood
directly from the heart to the entire lower body. These In cases where ultrasound is used as a treatment tool,
aneurysms are relatively common and increase in patients should educate themselves about the proposed
prevalence with age. A burst aortic aneurysm is immi- procedure with the help of their doctors—as is appropri-
nently life-threatening. However, they can be readily ate before any surgical procedure. Also,any abdominal
identified and monitored with ultrasound before acute ultrasound procedure,diagnostic or therapeutic,may be
complications result. hampered by a patient’s body type or other factors,such
as the presence of excessive bowel gas (which is opaque
Ultrasound technology can also be used for treat-
to ultrasound). In particular,very obese people are often
ment purposes, most frequently as a visual aid during
not good candidates for abdominal ultrasound.
surgical procedures—such as guiding needle placement
to drain fluid from a cyst, or to extract tumor cells for
biopsy. Increasingly,direct therapeutic applications for Description
ultrasound are being developed.
Ultrasound includes all sound waves above the fre-
The direct therapeutic value of ultrasonic waves lies quency of human hearing—about 20 thousand hertz,or
in their mechanical nature. They are shock waves,just like cycles per second. Medical ultrasound generally uses fre-
audible sound, and vibrate the materials through which quencies between one and 10 million hertz (1-10 MHz).
2 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
dnuosartlu
lanimodbA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 2
KEY TERMS
Accessory organ—A lump of tissue adjacent to an and expensive to perform, and they use ionizing
organ that is similar to it, but which serves no electromagnetic radiation.
important purpose, if functional at all. While not
Doppler—The Doppler effect refers to the apparent
necessarily harmful, such organs can cause prob-
change in frequency of sound wave echoes returning
lems if they grow too large or become cancerous. In
to a stationary source from a moving target. If the
any case, their presence points to an underlying
object is moving toward the source, the frequency
abnormality in the parent organ.
increases; if the object is moving away, the frequen-
Benign—In medical usage, benign is the opposite of cy decreases. The size of this frequency shift can be
malignant. It describes an abnormal growth that is used to compute the object’s speed—be it a car on
stable, treatable and generally not life-threatening. the road or blood in an artery. The Doppler effect
holds true for all types of radiation, not just sound.
Biopsy—The surgical removal and analysis of a tis-
sue sample for diagnostic purposes. Usually, the Frequency—Sound, whether traveling through air
term refers to the collection and analysis of tissue or the human body, produces vibrations—mole-
from a suspected tumor to establish malignancy. cules bouncing into each other—as the shock wave
travels along. The frequency of a sound is the num-
Calculus—Any type of hard concretion (stone) in
ber of vibrations per second. Within the audible
the body, but usually found in the gallbladder, pan-
range, frequency means pitch—the higher the fre-
creas and kidneys. They are formed by the accumu-
quency, the higher a sound’s pitch.
lation of excess mineral salts and other organic
material such as blood or mucous. Calculi (pl.) can Ionizing radiation—Radiation that can damage liv-
cause problems by lodging in and obstructing the ing tissue by disrupting and destroying individual
proper flow of fluids, such as bile to the intestines or cells at the molecular level. All types of nuclear
urine to the bladder. radiation—x rays, gamma rays and beta rays—are
potentially ionizing. Sound waves physically vibrate
Cirrhosis—A chronic liver disease characterized by
the material through which they pass, but do not
the invasion of connective tissue and the degenera-
ionize it.
tion of proper functioning—jaundice is often an
accompanying symptom. Causes of cirrhosis include Jaundice—A condition that results in a yellow tint
alcoholism, metabolic diseases, syphilis and conges- to the skin, eyes and body fluids. Bile retention in
tive heart disease. the liver, gallbladder and pancreas is the immediate
cause, but the underlying cause could be as simple
Common bile duct—The branching passage
as obstruction of the common bile duct by a gall-
through which bile—a necessary digestive
stone or as serious as pancreatic cancer. Ultrasound
enzyme—travels from the liver and gallbladder into
can distinguish between these conditions.
the small intestine. Digestive enzymes from the
pancreas also enter the intestines through the com- Malignant—The term literally means growing worse
mon bile duct. and resisting treatment. It is used as a synonym for
cancerous and connotes a harmful condition that
Computed tomography scan (CT scan)—A special-
generally is life-threatening.
ized type of x-ray imaging that uses highly focused
and relatively low energy radiation to produce Morphology—Literally, the study of form. In medi-
detailed two-dimensional images of soft tissue cine, morphology refers to the size, shape and
structures, particularly the brain. CT scans are the structure rather than the function of a given organ.
chief competitor to ultrasound and can yield higher As a diagnostic imaging technique, ultrasound facil-
quality images not disrupted by bone or gas. They itates the recognition of abnormal morphologies as
are, however, more cumbersome, time consuming symptoms of underlying conditions.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 3
Abdominal
ultrasound
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 3
Higher frequency ultrasound waves produce more mode ultrasound has been put to particular use in
detailed images,but are also more readily absorbed and studying heart motion.
so cannot penetrate as deeply into the body. Abdominal
•Doppler mode. Doppler ultrasonographyincludes the
ultrasound imaging is generally performed at frequencies
capability of accurately measuring velocities of moving
between 2-5 MHz.
material,such as blood in arteries and veins. The prin-
An ultrasound machine consists of two parts: the ciple is the same as that used in radar guns that measure
transducer and the analyzer. The transducer both produces the speed of a car on the highway. Doppler capability is
the sound waves that penetrate the body and receives the most often combined with B-mode scanning to produce
reflected echoes. Transducers are built around piezoelec- images of blood vessels from which blood flow can be
tric ceramic chips. (Piezoelectric refers to electricity that directly measured. This technique is used extensively to
is produced when you put pressure on certain crystals investigate valve defects, arteriosclerosis and hyper-
such as quartz). These ceramic chips react to electric puls- tension,particularly in the heart,but also in the abdom-
es by producing sound waves ( they are transmitting inal aorta and the portal vein of the liver. These
waves) and react to sound waves by producing electric machines cost about $250,000.
pulses (receiving). Bursts of high frequency electric puls-
The actual procedure for a patient undergoing an
es supplied to the transducer causes it to produce the
abdominal ultrasound is relatively simple,regardless of
scanning sound waves. The transducer then receives the
the type of scan or its purpose. Fastingfor at least eight
returning echoes,translates them back into electric pulses
hours prior to the procedure ensures that the stomach is
and sends them to the analyzer—a computer that orga-
empty and as small as possible, and that the intestines
nizes the data into an image on a television screen.
and bowels are relatively inactive. Fasting also allows the
Because sound waves travel through all the body’s gall bladder to be seen, as it contracts after eating and
tissues at nearly the same speed—about 3,400 miles per may not be seen if the stomach is full. In some cases,a
hour—the microseconds it takes for each echo to be full bladder helps to push intestinal folds out of the way
received can be plotted on the screen as a distance into the so that the gas they contain does not disrupt the image.
body. The relative strength of each echo,a function of the The patient’s abdomen is then greased with a special gel
specific tissue or organ boundary that produced it,can be that allows the ultrasound probe to glide easily across the
plotted as a point of varying brightness. In this way,the skin while transmitting and receiving ultrasonic pulses.
echoes are translated into a picture. Tissues surrounded
This procedure is conducted by a doctor with the
by bone or filled with gas (the stomach, intestines and
assistance of a technologist skilled in operating the
bowel) cannot be imaged using ultrasound,because the
equipment. The probe is moved around the abdomen to
waves are blocked or become randomly scattered.
obtain different views of the target areas. The patient will
Four different modes of ultrasound are used in med- likely be asked to change positions from side to side and
ical imaging: to hold their breath as necessary to obtain the desired
•A-mode. This is the simplest type of ultrasound in views. Discomfort during the procedure is minimal.
which a single transducer scans a line through the body
The many types and uses of ultrasound technology
with the echoes plotted on screen as a function of
makes it difficult to generalize about the time and costs
depth. This method is used to measure distances within
involved. Relatively simple imaging—scanning a suspi-
the body and the size of internal organs. Therapeutic
cious abdominal mass or a suspected abdominal aortic
ultrasound aimed at a specific tumor or calculus is also
aneurysm—will take about half an hour to perform and
A-mode, to allow for pinpoint accurate focus of the
will cost a few hundred dollars or more, depending on
destructive wave energy.
the quality of the equipment,the operator and other fac-
•B-mode. In B-mode ultrasound,a linear array of trans- tors. More involved techniques such as multiple M-mode
ducers simultaneously scans a plane through the body and Doppler-enhanced scans,or cases where the targets
that can be viewed as a two-dimensional image on not well defined in advance, generally take more time
screen. Ultrasound probes containing more than 100 and are more expensive.
transducers in sequence form the basis for these most
Regardless of the type of scan used and the potential
commonly used scanners,which cost about $50,000.
difficulties encountered,ultrasound remains faster and
•M-Mode. The M stands for motion. A rapid sequence less expensive than computed tomography scans(CT),
of B-mode scans whose images follow each other in its primary rival in abdominal imaging. Furthermore,as
sequence on screen enables doctors to see and mea- abdominal ultrasounds are generally undertaken as
sure range of motion, as the organ boundaries that “medically necessary”procedures designed to detect the
produce reflections move relative to the probe. M- presence of suspected abnormalities, they are covered
4 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
dnuosartlu
lanimodbA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 4
under most types of major medical insurance. As always, of a scan often will prove abnormal—that is they will
though,the patient would be wise to confirm that their confirm the diagnosis,be it kidney stones,cirrhosis of
coverage extends to the specific procedure proposed. For the liver or an aortic aneurysm. At that point,appropriate
nonemergency situations, most underwriters stipulate medical treatment as prescribed by a patient’s doctor is in
prior approval as a condition of coverage. order. See the relevant disease and disorder entries in this
encyclopedia for more information.
Specific conditions for which ultrasound may be
selected as a treatment option—certain types of tumors,
Resources
lesions,kidney stonesand other calculi,muscle and lig-
ament injuries, etc.—are described in detail under the BOOKS
appropriate entries in this encyclopedia. Hall,Rebecca. The Ultrasonic Handbook:Clinical,Etiologic
and Pathologic Implications of Sonographic Findings.
Preparation Philadelphia:Lippincott,1993.
Kevles,Bettyann Holtzmann. Naked to the Bone:Medical
A patient undergoing abdominal ultrasound will be
Imaging in the Twentieth Century.New Brunswick,NJ:
advised by their physician about what to expect and how Rutgers University Press,1997.
to prepare. As mentioned above,preparations generally Kremkau,Frederick W. Diagnostic Ultrasound:Principles and
include fasting and arriving for the procedure with a full Instruments.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1993.
bladder,if necessary. This preparation is particularly use- Shtasel,Philip. Medical Tests and Diagnostic Procedures:A
ful if the gallbladder,ovaries or veins are to be examined. Patient’s Guide to Just What the Doctor Ordered.New
York:Harper & Row,1991.
Tempkin,Betty Bates. Ultrasound Scanning:Principles and
Aftercare
Protocols.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1993.
In general, no aftercare related to the abdominal The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests.Ed. Barry L. Zaret,et al.
ultrasound procedure itself is required. Boston:Houghton Mifflin,1997.
PERIODICALS
Risks
“Ultrasound Detects Stomach Problems.”USA Today Maga-
Abdominal ultrasound carries with it no recognized zine (October 1992):5.
risks or side effects,if properly performed using appropri- Freundlich,Naomi. “Ultrasound:What’s Wrong with this Pic-
ture?”Business Week(15 September 1997):84-5.
ate frequency and intensity ranges. Sensitive tissues,par-
McDonagh,D. Brian. “Ultrasound:Unsung Medical Hero.”
ticularly those of the reproductive organs,could possibly
USA Today Magazine(September 1996):66-7.
sustain damage if violently vibrated by overly intense
Murray,Maxine. “Basics of Ultrasonography.”Student British
ultrasound waves. In general though,such damage would
Medical Journal(August 1996):269-72.
only result from improper use of the equipment.
Tait,N.,and J. M. Little. “The Treatment of Gallstones.”
Any woman who thinks she might be pregnant British Medical Journal(8 July 1995):99-105.
should raise this issue with her doctor before undergoing
ORGANIZATIONS
an abdominal ultrasound,as a fetus in the early stages of
American College of Gastroenterology. 4900 B South 31st St.,
development could be injured by ultrasound meant to Arlington,VA 22206-1656. (703) 820-7400. <http://www.
probe deeply recessed abdominal organs. acg.gi.org>.
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine. 14750 Sweitzer
Normal results Lane,Suite 100,Laurel,MD 20707-5906. (800) 638-
5352. <http://www.aium.org>.
As a diagnostic imaging technique,a normal abdom- American Society of Radiologic Technologists. 15000 Central
inal ultrasound is one that indicates the absence of the Ave.,SE,Albuquerque,NM 87123-3917. (505) 298-4500.
suspected condition that prompted the scan. For example, <http://www.asrt.org>.
symptoms such as a persistent cough,labored breathing,
and upper abdominal pain suggest the possibility of, Kurt Richard Sternlof
among other things,an abdominal aortic aneurysm. An
ultrasound scan that indicates the absence of an aneurysm
would rule out this life-threatening condition and point to
other,less serious causes.
Abdominal wall defects
Abnormal results Definition
Because abdominal ultrasound imaging is generally Abdominal wall defects are birth (congenital)
undertaken to confirm a suspected condition,the results defects that allow the stomach or intestines to protrude.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 5
Abdominal
wall
defects
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 5
10% of those with more severe or additional abnormali-
KEY TERMS ties die from it. The organs themselves are fully function-
al; the difficulty lies in fitting them inside the abdomen.
Hernia—Movement of a structure into a place it The condition is,in fact,a herniarequiring only replace-
does not belong. ment and strengthening of the passageway through
which it occurred. After surgery, increased pressure in
Umbilical—Referring to the opening in the
the stretched abdomen can compromise the function of
abdominal wall where the blood vessels from the
the organs inside.
placenta enter.
Viscera—Any of the body’s organs located in the
Prevention
chest or abdomen.
Some, but by no means all, birth defects are pre-
ventable by early and attentive prenatal care,good nutri-
tion, supplemental vitamins, diligent avoidance of all
Description unnecessary drugs and chemicals—especially tobacco—
and other elements of a healthy lifestyle.
Many unexpected and fascinating events occur dur-
ing the development of a fetus inside the womb. The
Resources
stomach and intestines begin development outside the
baby’s abdomen and only later does the abdominal wall PERIODICALS
enclose them. Occasionally,either the umbilical opening Dunn,J. C.,and E. W. Fonkalsrud. “Improved Survival of
is too large,or it develops improperly,allowing the bow- Infants with Omphalocele.”American Journal of Surgery
els or stomach to remain outside or squeeze through the 173 (April 1997):284-7.
abdominal wall. Langer,J. C. “Gastroschisis and Omphalocele.”Seminars in
Pediatric Surgery5 (May 1996):124-8.
Causes and symptoms
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
There are many causes for birth defects that still
Abnormal heart rhythms see Arrhythmias
remain unclear. Presently,the cause(s) of abdominal wall
defects is unknown,and any symptoms the mother may ABO blood typing see Blood typing and
have to indicate that the defects are present in the fetus
crossmatching
are nondescript.
ABO incompatibility see Erythroblastosis
fetalis
Diagnosis
Abortion, habitual see Recurrent
At birth,the problem is obvious,because the base of
the umbilical cord at the navel will bulge or, in worse miscarriage
cases,contain viscera (internal organs). Before birth,an
ultrasound examination may detect the problem. It is
always necessary in children with one birth defect to look
for others,because birth defects are usually multiple.
Abortion, partial birth
Treatment
Definition
Abdominal wall defects are effectively treated with
surgical repair. Unless there are accompanying anom- Partial birth abortion is a method of late-term abor-
alies,the surgical procedure is not overly complicated. tion that terminates a pregnancyand results in the death
The organs are normal,just misplaced. However,if the and intact removal of a fetus. This procedure is most
defect is large,it may be difficult to fit all the viscera into commonly referred to as intact dilatation and extraction
the small abdominal cavity. (D & X).
Prognosis Purpose
If there are no other defects,the prognosis after sur- Partial birth abortion,or D&X,is performed to end a
gical repair of this condition is relatively good. However, pregnancy and results in the death of a fetus,typically in
6 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
htrib
laitrap
,noitrobA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 6
the late second or third trimester. Although D&X is high-
ly controversial,some physicians argue that it has advan- KEY TERMS
tages that make it a preferable procedure in some circum-
stances. One perceived advantage is that the fetus is Cervix—The narrow outer end of the uterus that
removed largely intact,allowing for better evaluation and separates the uterus from the vaginal canal.
autopsyof the fetus in cases of known fetal anomalies.
Footling breech—A position of the fetus while in
Intact removal of the fetus may also confer a lower risk
the uterus where the feet of the fetus are nearest
of puncturing the uterus or damaging the cervix. Another
the cervix would be the first part of the fetus to exit
perceived advantage is that D&X ends the pregnancy
the uterus, with the head of the fetus being the last
without requiring the woman to go through labor,which
part to exit the uterus.
may be less emotionally traumatic than other methods of
late-term abortion. In addition,D&X may offer a lower Laminaria—A medical product made from a cer-
cost and shorter procedure time. tain type of seaweed that is physically placed near
the cervix to cause it to dilate.
Precautions
Women considering D&X should be aware of the
highly controversial nature of this procedure. A contro- Aftercare
versy common to all late-term abortions is whether the
D&X typically does not require an overnight hospi-
fetus is viable,or able to survive outside of the woman’s
tal stay,so a follow up appointment may be scheduled to
body. A specific area of controversy with D&X is that
monitor the woman for any complications.
fetal death does not occur until after most of the fetal
body has exited the uterus. Several states have taken
legal action to limit or ban D&X and many physicians
Risks
who perform abortions do not perform D&X. This may
restrict the availability of this procedure to women seek- With all abortion,the later in pregnancy an abortion
ing late-term abortion. is performed, the more complicated the procedure and
the greater the risk of injury to the woman. In addition to
associated emotion reactions, D&X carries the risk of
Description
injury to the woman, including heavy bleeding, blood
Intact D&X,or partial birth abortion first involves clots, damage to the cervix or uterus, pelvic infection,
administration of medications to cause the cervix to and anesthesia-related complications. There is also a risk
dilate,usually over the course of several days. Next,the of incomplete abortion, meaning that the fetus is not
physician rotates the fetus to a footling breech position. dead when removed from the woman’s body. Possible
The body of the fetus is then drawn out of the uterus feet long-term risks include difficulty becoming pregnant or
first,until only the head remains inside the uterus. Then, carrying a future pregnancy to term.
the physician uses an instrument to puncture the base of
the skull,which collapses the fetal head. Typically,the
Normal results
contents of the fetal head are then partially suctioned out,
which results in the death of the fetus,and reduces the The expected outcome of D&X is the termination of
sizes of the fetal head enough to allow it to pass through a pregnancy with removal of a dead fetus from the
the cervix. The dead and otherwise intact fetus is then woman’s body.
removed from the woman’s body.
Resources
Preparation
PERIODICALS
Medical preparation for D&X involves an outpatient Epner,Janet E.,et al. “Late-term Abortion.”JAMA280,no. 8
visit to administer medications, such as laminaria, to (26 August 1998):724-729.
cause the cervix to begin dilating. Sprang,M. LeRoy,and Neerhof,Mark G. “Rationale for Ban-
ning Abortions Late in Pregnancy.”JAMA(26 August
In addition,preparation may involve fulfilling local
1998):744-747.
legal requirements,such as a mandatory waiting period,
Swomley,John M. “The ‘Partial-birth’Debate in 1998.”
counseling,or an informed consent procedure reviewing Humanist(March/April 1998):5-7.
stages of fetal development,childbirth,alternative abor- Grimes,David A. “The Continuing Need for Late Abortion.”
tion methods,and adoption. JAMA(26 August 1998):747-750.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 7
Abortion,
partial
birth
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 7
ORGANIZATIONS when performed in early pregnancy. It is a simple proce-
Planned Parenthood Federation of America. 810 Seventh Ave., dure and can be performed on an outpatient basis. A nee-
New York,NY 10019. (212) 541-7800. FAX:(212) 245- dle is inserted into the woman’s stomach or vagina and
1845. potassium chloride is injected into the fetus.
OTHER
Status of partial-birth abortion laws in the states.Othmer Insti-
Preparation
tute at Planned Parenthood of NYC. 2000.
Individuals who have chosen selective reduction to
Stefanie B. N. Dugan,M.S. safeguard the remaining fetuses should be counseled
prior to the procedure. Individuals should receive infor-
mation regarding the risks of a multi-fetal pregnancy to
both the fetuses and the mother compared with the risks
after the reduction.
Abortion, selective
Individuals seeking an abortion for any reason
should consider the ethical implications whether it be
Definition
because the fetus is not the preferred sex or because the
Selective abortion, also known as selective reduc- fetus would be born with a severe birth defect.
tion, refers to choosing to abort a fetus, typically in a
multi-fetal pregnancy,to decrease the health risks to the
Aftercare
mother in carrying and giving birth to more than one or
two babies,and also to decrease the risk of complications Counseling should continue after the abortion
to the remaining fetus(es). The term selective abortion because it is a traumatic event. Individuals may feel
also refers to choosing to abort a fetus for reasons such as guilty about choosing one fetus over another. Mental
the woman is carrying a fetus which likely will be born health professionals should be consulted throughout the
with some birth defect or impairment,or because the sex process.
of the fetus is not preferred by the individual.
Risks
Purpose
About 75% of women who undergo selective reduc-
A woman may decide to abort for health reasons,for
tion will go into premature labor. About 4-5% of
example,she is at higher risk for complications during preg-
women undergoing selective reduction also miscarry one
nancy because of a disorder or disease such as diabetes.
or more of the remaining fetuses. The risks associated
However,selective reduction is recommended often in with multi-fetal pregnancy is considered higher.
cases of multi-fetal pregnancy,or the presence of more than
one fetus,typically,at least three or more fetuses. In the
Normal results
general population,multi-fetal pregnancy happens in only
about 1-2% of pregnant women. But multi-fetal pregnan- In cases where a multi-fetal pregnancy, three or
cies occur far more often in women using fertility drugs. more fetuses,is reduced to two,the twin fetuses typically
develop as they would as if they were conceived as twins.
Precautions
Resources
Because women or couples who use fertility drugs
have made an extra effort to become pregnant,it is possi- BOOKS
ble that the individuals may be unwilling or uncomfort- Knobil,Ernst and Jimmy D. Neill,editors. “Abortion.”In
able with the decision to abort a fetus in cases of multi- Encyclopedia of Reproduction.San Diego:Adademic
fetal pregnancy. Individuals engaging in fertility treat- Press,1998,pp.1-5.
ment should be made aware of the risk of multi-fetal Scott,James R.,editor. “Induced Abortion.”In Danforth’s
Obstetrics and Gynecology.Philadelphia:Lippincott
pregnancy and consider the prospect of recommended
Williams & Wilkins,1999,pp.567-578.
reduction before undergoing fertility treatment.
PERIODICALS
Description Author unspecified. “Multiple Pregnancy Associated With
Infertility Therapy.”American Society for Reproductive
Selective reduction is usually performed between Medicine,A Practice Committee Report(November
nine and 12 weeks of pregnancy and is most successful 2000):1-8.
8 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
evitceles
,noitrobA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 8
rate of complications. Abortions after 24 weeks are
KEY TERMS extremely rare and are usually limited to situations where
the life of the mother is in danger.
Multi-fetal pregnancy—A pregnancy of two or
more fetuses.
Precautions
Selective reduction—Typically referred to in cases
Most women are able to have abortions at clinics or
of multifetal pregnancy, when one or more fetuses
outpatient facilities if the procedure is performed early in
are aborted to preserve the viability of the remain-
pregnancy. Women who have stable diabetes,controlled
ing fetuses and decrease health risks to the mother.
epilepsy,mild to moderate high blood pressure,or who
are HIV positive can often have abortions as outpatients
if precautions are taken. Women with heart disease,pre-
vious endocarditis,asthma,lupus erythematosus,uter-
ORGANIZATIONS
ine fibroid tumors,blood clotting disorders,poorly con-
The American Society for Reproductive Medicine. 1209 Mont-
trolled epilepsy,or some psychological disorders usually
gomery Highway,Birmingham,AL 35216-2809. (205)
need to be hospitalized in order to receive special moni-
978-5000. <http://www.asrm.org>.
toring and medications during the procedure.
The Alan Guttmacher Institute. 120 Wall Street,New York,NY
10005. (212) 248-1111. <http://www.agi-usa.org>.
Description
Meghan M. Gourley
Very early abortions
Abortion, spontaneous see Miscarriage
Between five and seven weeks,a pregnancy can be
ended by a procedure called menstrual extraction. This
procedure is also sometimes called menstrual regulation,
mini-suction,or preemptive abortion. The contents of the
uterus are suctioned out through a thin (3-4 mm) plastic
tube that is inserted through the undilated cervix. Suction
Abortion, therapeutic
is applied either by a bulb syringe or a small pump.
Definition Another method is called the “morning after”pill,or
emergency contraception. Basically,it involves taking
Therapeutic abortion is the intentional termination
high doses of birth control pills within 24 to 48 hours of
of a pregnancybefore the fetus can live independently.
having unprotected sex. The high doses of hormones
Abortion has been a legal procedure in the United States
causes the uterine lining to change so that it will not sup-
since 1973.
port a pregnancy. Thus,if the egg has been fertilized,it is
simply expelled from the body.
Purpose
There are two types of emergency contraception.
An abortion may be performed whenever there is One type is identical to ordinary birth control pills,and
some compelling reason to end a pregnancy. Women uses the hormones estrogen and progestin). This type is
have abortions because continuing the pregnancy would available with a prescription under the brand name Pre-
cause them hardship, endanger their life or health, or ven. But women can even use their regular birth control
because prenatal testing has shown that the fetus will be pills for emergency contraception,after they check with
born with severe abnormalities. their doctor about the proper dose. About half of women
who use birth control pills for emergency contraception
Abortions are safest when performed within the first
get nauseated and 20 percent vomit. This method cuts the
six to 10 weeks after the last menstrual period. The cal-
risk of pregnancy 75 percent.
culation of this date is referred to as the gestational age
and is used in determining the stage of pregnancy. For The other type of morning-after pill contains only
example, a woman who is two weeks late having her one hormone:progestin,and is available under the brand
period is said to be six weeks pregnant,because it is six name Plan B. It is more effective than the first type with
weeks since she last menstruated. a lower risk of nausea and vomiting. It reduces the risk
of pregnancy 89 percent.
About 90% of women who have abortions do so
before 13 weeks and experience few complications. Women should check with their physicians regard-
Abortions performed between 13-24 weeks have a higher ing the proper dose of pills to take,as it depends on the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 9
Abortion,
therapeutic
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 9
•The procedure may require multiple visits to the doctor.
•Bleeding after the abortion lasts longer than after a sur-
gical abortion.
•The woman may see the contents of her womb as it is
expelled.
Two different medications can be used to bring about
an abortion. Methotrexate (Rheumatrex) works by stop-
ping fetal cells from dividing which causes the fetus to die.
On the first visit to the doctor,the woman receives
an injection of methotrexate. On the second visit,about
a week later, she is given misoprostol (Cytotec), an
oxygenated unsaturated cyclic fatty acid responsible for
various hormonal reactions such as muscle contraction
(prostaglandin), that stimulates contractions of the
uterus. Within two weeks, the woman will expel the
contents of her uterus,ending the pregnancy. A follow-
up visit to the doctor is necessary to assure that the
abortion is complete.
With this procedure, a woman will feel cramping
and may feel nauseated from the misoprostol. This
combination of drugs is 90-96% effective in ending
pregnancy.
Mifepristone(RU-486),which goes by the brand
name Mifeprex,works by blocking the action of prog-
brand of birth control pill. Not all birth control pills will
esterone,a hormone needed for pregnancy to continue,
work for emergency contraception.
then stimulates uterine contractions thus ending the
Menstrual extractions are safe, but because the
pregnancy. It can be taken a much as 49 days after the
amount of fetal material is so small at this stage of devel-
first day of a woman’s last period. On the first visit to
opment,it is easy to miss. This results in an incomplete
the doctor,a woman takes a mifepristone pill. Two days
abortion that means the pregnancy continues.
later she returns and, if the miscarriage has not
occurred,takes two misoprostol pills,which causes the
First trimester abortions uterus to contract. Five percent of women won’t need to
take misoprostol. After an observation period, she
The first trimester of pregnancy includes the first 13
returns home.
weeks after the last menstrual period. In the United
States,about 90% of abortions are performed during this Within four days,90% of women have expelled the
period. It is the safest time in which to have an abortion, contents of their uterus and completed the abortion.
and the time in which women have the most choice of Within 14 days,95-97% of women have completed the
how the procedure is performed. abortion. A third follow-up visit to the doctor is neces-
sary to confirm through observation or ultrasound that
MEDICAL ABORTIONS. Medical abortions are brought
the procedure is complete. In the event that it is not, a
about by taking medications that end the pregnancy. The
surgical abortion is performed. Studies show that 4.5 to 8
advantages of a first trimester medical abortion are:
percent of women need surgery or a blood transfusion
•The procedure is non-invasive; no surgical instruments
after taking mifepristone,and the pregnancy persists in
are used.
about 1 percent of women. In this case,surgical abortion
•Anesthesia is not required. is recommended because the fetus may be damanged.
Side effects include nausea,vaginal bleeding and heavy
•Drugs are administered either orally or by injection.
cramping. The bleeding is typically heavier than a nor-
•The procedure resembles a natural miscarriage. mal period and may last up to 16 days.
Disadvantages of a medical abortion are:
Mifepristone is not recommended for women with
•The effectiveness decreases after the seventh week. ectopic pregnancy,an IUD,who have been taking long-
10 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
cituepareht
,noitrobA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 10
Vulsellum
Vagina
Uterus
Embryonic
tissue
Speculum
Extraction tube
Cervix
Between 5 and 7 weeks,a pregnancy can be ended by a pro-
cedure called menstrual extraction.The contents of the
uterus are suctioned out through a thin extraction tube that
is inserted through the undilated cervix.(Illustration by Elec-
tronic Illustrators Group.)
term steroidal therapy,have bleeding abnormalities or on
blood-thinners such as Coumadin. KEY TERMS
Surgical abortions Endocarditis—An infection of the inner mem-
brane lining of the heart.
First trimester surgical abortions are performed
using vacuum aspiration. The procedure is also called Fibroid tumors—Fibroid tumors are non-cancer-
dilation and evacuation (D & E),suction dilation,vacu- ous (benign) growths in the uterus. They occur in
um curettage,or suction curettage. 30-40% of women over age 40, and do not need
to be removed unless they are causing symptoms
Advantages of a vacuum aspiration abortion are:
that interfere with a woman’s normal activities.
•It is usually done as a one-day outpatient procedure.
Lupus erythematosus—A chronic inflammatory
•The procedure takes only 10-15 minutes. disease in which inappropriate immune system
•Bleeding after the abortion lasts five days or less. reactions cause abnormalities in the blood vessels
and connective tissue.
•The woman does not see the products of her womb
being removed. Prostaglandin—Oxygenated unsaturated cyclic
fatty acids responsible for various hormonal reac-
Disadvantages include:
tions such as muscle contraction.
•The procedure is invasive; surgical instruments are used.
Rh negative—Lacking the Rh factor, genetically
•Infection may occur. determined antigens in red blood cells that pro-
During a vacuum aspiration,the woman’s cervix is duce immune responses. If an Rh negative woman
gradually dilated by expanding rods inserted into the is pregnant with an Rh positive fetus, her body will
cervical opening. Once dilated,a tube attached to a suc- produce antibodies against the fetus’s blood, caus-
tion pump is inserted through the cervix and the con- ing a disease known as Rh disease. Sensitization to
tents of the uterus are suctioned out. The procedure is the disease occurs when the women’s blood is
97-99% effective. The amount of discomfort a woman exposed to the fetus’s blood. Rh immune globulin
feels varies considerably. Local anesthesia is often (RhoGAM) is a vaccine that must be given to a
given to numb the cervix,but it does not mask uterine woman after an abortion, miscarriage, or prenatal
cramping. After a few hours of rest, the woman may tests in order to prevent sensitization to Rh disease.
return home.
Second trimester abortions
Although it is better to have an abortion during the have rods inserted in her cervix to help dilate it or to
first trimester,some second trimester abortions may be receive medication that will soften the cervix and speed
inevitable. The results of genetic testing are often not up labor.
available until 16 weeks. In addition,women,especially
On the day of the abortion, drugs, usually prosta-
teens,may not have recognized the pregnancy or come to
glandins to induce contractions,and a salt water solution,
terms with it emotionally soon enough to have a first
are injected into the uterus. Contractions begin,and with-
trimester abortion. Teens make up the largest group hav-
in eight to 72 hours the woman delivers the fetus.
ing second trimester abortions.
Side effects of this procedure include nausea,vomit-
Some second trimester abortions are performed as a
ing, and diarrhea from the prostaglandins, and pain
D & E. The procedures are similar to those used in the
from uterine cramps. Anesthesia of the sort used in
first trimester, but a larger suction tube must be used
childbirthcan be given to mask the pain. Many women
because more material must be removed. This increases
are able to go home a few hours after the procedure.
the amount of cervical dilation necessary and increases
the risk of the procedure. Many physicians are reluctant
Very early abortions cost between $200-$400. Later
to perform a D & E this late in pregnancy,and for some
abortions cost more. The cost increases about $100 per
women is it not a medically safe option.
week between the thirteenth and sixteenth week. Second
The alternative to a D & E in the second trimester is trimester abortions are much more costly because they
an abortion by induced labor. Induced labor may require often involve more risk,more services,anesthesia,and
an overnight stay in a hospital. The day before the proce- sometimes a hospital stay. Insurance carriers and HMOs
dure,the woman visits the doctor for tests,and to either may or may not cover the procedure. Federal law pro-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 11
Abortion,
therapeutic
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 11
hibits federal funds including Medicaid funds, from Complications from abortions can include:
being used to pay for an elective abortion.
•uncontrolled bleeding
•infection
Preparation
•blood clots accumulating in the uterus
The doctor must know accurately the stage of a
•a tear in the cervix or uterus
woman’s pregnancy before an abortion is performed. The
doctor will ask the woman questions about her menstrual •missed abortion where the pregnancy continues
cycle and also do a physical examinationto confirm the •incomplete abortion where some material from the
stage of pregnancy. This may be done at an office visit pregnancy remains in the uterus
before the abortion or on the day of the abortion. Some
Women who experience any of the following symp-
states require a waiting period before an abortion can be
toms of post-abortion complications should call the clin-
performed. Others require parental or court consent for a
ic or doctor who performed the abortion immediately.
child under age 18 to receive an abortion.
•severe pain
Despite the fact that almost half of all women in the
•fever over 100.4°F (38.2°C)
United States have had at least one abortion by the time
•heavy bleeding that soaks through more than one sani-
they reach age 45,abortion is surrounded by controversy.
tary pad per hour
Women often find themselves in emotional turmoil when
deciding if an abortion is a procedure they wish to under- •foul-smelling discharge from the vagina
go. Pre-abortion counseling is important in helping a •continuing symptoms of pregnancy
woman resolve any questions she may have about having
the procedure.
Normal results
Usually the pregnancy is ended without complica-
Aftercare
tion and without altering future fertility.
Regardless of the method used to perform the abor-
tion, a woman will be observed for a period of time to
Resources
make sure her blood pressure is stable and that bleeding
is controlled. The doctor may prescribe antibiotics to BOOKS
reduce the chance of infection. Women who are Rh nega- Carlson,Karen J.,Stephanie A. Eisenstat,and Terra Ziporyn.
“Abortion.”In The Harvard Guide to Women’s Health.
tive (lacking genetically determined antigens in their red
Cambridge,MA:Harvard University Press,1996.
blood cells that produce immune responses) should be
DeCherney,Alan H.,and Martin L. Peroll. “Contraception and
given a human Rh immune globulin (RhoGAM) after the
Family Planning.”In Current Obstetric and Gynecologic
procedure unless the father of the fetus is also Rh nega-
Diagnosis and Treatment.Norwalk,CT:Appleton &
tive. This prevents blood incompatibility complications
Lange,1994.
in future pregnancies.
ORGANIZATION
Bleeding will continue for about five days in a surgical
National Abortion Federation. (800) 772-9100. <http://www.
abortion and longer in a medical abortion. To decrease the prochoice.org>.
risk of infection,a woman should avoid intercourse and not
use tampons and douches for two weeks after the abortion. Debra Gordon
A follow-up visit is a necessary part of the woman’s
Abrasions see Wounds
aftercare. Contraception will be offered to women who
wish to avoid future pregnancies, because menstrual Abruptio placentae see Placental abruption
periods normally resume within a few weeks.
Risks
Serious complications resulting from abortions per-
Abscess
formed before 13 weeks are rare. Of the 90% of women
who have abortions in this time period,2.5% have minor
Definition
complications that can be handled without hospitaliza-
tion. Less than 0.5% have complications that require a An abscess is an enclosed collection of liquefied tis-
hospital stay. The rate of complications increases as the sue,known as pus,somewhere in the body. It is the result
pregnancy progresses. of the body’s defensive reaction to foreign material.
12 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ssecbA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 12
Description
There are two types of abscesses,septic and sterile.
Most abscesses are septic,which means that they are the
result of an infection. Septic abscesses can occur any-
where in the body. Only a germ and the body’s immune
response are required. In response to the invading germ,
white blood cells gather at the infected site and begin
producing chemicals called enzymes that attack the germ
by digesting it. These enzymes act like acid,killing the
germs and breaking them down into small pieces that can
be picked up by the circulation and eliminated from the
body. Unfortunately, these chemicals also digest body
tissues. In most cases,the germ produces similar chemi-
cals. The result is a thick,yellow liquid—pus—contain-
ing digested germs, digested tissue, white blood cells,
and enzymes.
An abscess is the last stage of a tissue infection that Causes and symptoms
begins with a process called inflammation. Initially,as
Many different agents cause abscesses. The most
the invading germ activates the body’s immune system,
common are the pus-forming (pyogenic) bacteria like
several events occur:
Staphylococcus aureus,which is nearly always the cause
•Blood flow to the area increases.
of abscesses under the skin. Abscesses near the large
•The temperature of the area increases due to the bowel,particularly around the anus,may be caused by
increased blood supply. any of the numerous bacteria found within the large
bowel. Brain abscesses and liver abscesses can be caused
•The area swells due to the accumulation of water,blood,
by any organism that can travel there through the circula-
and other liquids.
tion. Bacteria, amoeba, and certain fungi can travel in
•It turns red. this fashion. Abscesses in other parts of the body are
caused by organisms that normally inhabit nearby struc-
•It hurts,because of the irritation from the swelling and
tures or that infect them. Some common causes of specif-
the chemical activity.
ic abscesses are:
These four signs—heat,swelling,redness,and pain—
characterize inflammation. •skin abscesses by normal skin flora
As the process progresses,the tissue begins to turn •dental and throat abscesses by mouth flora
to liquid, and an abscess forms. It is the nature of an
•lung abscesses by normal airway flora, pneumonia
abscess to spread as the chemical digestion liquefies
germs,or tuberculosis
more and more tissue. Furthermore, the spreading fol-
lows the path of least resistance—the tissues most easily •abdominal and anal abscesses by normal bowel flora
digested. A good example is an abscess just beneath the
skin. It most easily continues along beneath the skin
rather than working its way through the skin where it Specific types of abscesses
could drain its toxic contents. The contents of the abscess
Listed below are some of the more common and
also leak into the general circulation and produce symp-
important abscesses.
toms just like any other infection. These include chills,
fever,aching,and general discomfort. •Carbuncles and other boils. Skin oil glands (sebaceous
glands) on the back or the back of the neck are the ones
Sterile abscesses are sometimes a milder form of the
usually infected. The most common germ involved is
same process caused not by germs but by non-living irri-
Staphylococcus aureus. Acneis a similar condition of
tants such as drugs. If an injected drug like penicillin is
sebaceous glands on the face and back.
not absorbed, it stays where it was injected and may
cause enough irritation to generate a sterile abscess— •Pilonidal abscess. Many people have as a birth defect a
sterile because there is no infection involved. Sterile tiny opening in the skin just above the anus. Fecal bac-
abscesses are quite likely to turn into hard,solid lumps as teria can enter this opening,causing an infection and
they scar,rather than remaining pockets of pus. subsequent abscess.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 13
Abcess
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 13
An amoebic abscess caused by Entameoba histolytica.
(Phototake NYC.Reproduced by permission.)
locate the site of an abscess,but usually something in the
KEY TERMS initial evaluation directs the search. Recent or chronic dis-
ease in an organ suggests it may be the site of an abscess.
Cellulitis—Inflammation of tissue due to infection. Dysfunction of an organ or system—for instance,seizures
or altered bowel function—may provide the clue. Pain
Enzyme—Any of a number of protein chemicals
and tenderness on physical examination are common
that can change other chemicals.
findings. Sometimes a deep abscess will eat a small chan-
Fallopian tubes—Part of the internal female anato- nel (sinus) to the surface and begin leaking pus. A sterile
my that carries eggs from the ovaries to the uterus. abscess may cause only a painful lump deep in the but-
Flora—Living inhabitants of a region or area. tock where a shot was given.
Pyogenic—Capable of generating pus. Streptococ-
cus, Staphocococcus, and bowel bacteria are the Treatment
primary pyogenic organisms.
Since skin is very resistant to the spread of infection,
Sebaceous glands—Tiny structures in the skin that it acts as a barrier,often keeping the toxic chemicals of
produce oil (sebum). If they become plugged, an abscess from escaping the body on their own. Thus,
sebum collects inside and forms a nurturing place the pus must be drained from the abscess by a physician.
for germs to grow. The surgeon determines when the abscess is ready for
drainage and opens a path to the outside, allowing the
Septicemia—The spread of an infectious agent
pus to escape. Ordinarily,the body handles the remaining
throughout the body by means of the blood
infection,sometimes with the help of antibioticsor other
stream.
drugs. The surgeon may leave a drain (a piece of cloth or
Sinus—A tubular channel connecting one body
rubber) in the abscess cavity to prevent it from closing
part with another or with the outside.
before all the pus has drained out.
Alternative treatment
•Retropharyngeal,parapharyngeal,peritonsillar abscess.
If an abscess is directly beneath the skin,it will be
As a result of throat infections like strep throat and
slowly working its way through the skin as it is more
tonsillitis,bacteria can invade the deeper tissues of the
rapidly working its way elsewhere. Since chemicals
throat and cause an abscess. These abscesses can com-
work faster at higher temperatures, applications of hot
promise swallowing and even breathing.
compresses to the skin over the abscess will hasten the
•Lung abscess. During or after pneumonia,whether it’s digestion of the skin and eventually result in its breaking
due to bacteria [common pneumonia], tuberculosis, down,releasing the pus spontaneously. This treatment is
fungi,parasites,or other germs,abscesses can develop best reserved for smaller abscesses in relatively less dan-
as a complication. gerous areas of the body—limbs,trunk,back of the neck.
It is also useful for all superficial abscesses in their very
•Liver abscess. Bacteria or amoeba from the intestines
early stages. It will “ripen”them.
can spread through the blood to the liver and cause
abscesses. Contrast hydrotherapy, alternating hot and cold
compresses,can also help assist the body in resorption of
•Psoas abscess. Deep in the back of the abdomen on
the abscess. There are two homeopathic remedies that
either side of the lumbar spine lie the psoas muscles.
work to rebalance the body in relation to abscess forma-
They flex the hips. An abscess can develop in one of
tion, Silica and Hepar sulphuris. In cases of septic
these muscles,usually when it spreads from the appen-
abscesses, bentonite clay packs (bentonite clay and a
dix,the large bowel,or the fallopian tubes.
small amount of Hydrastispowder) can be used to draw
the infection from the area.
Diagnosis
Prognosis
The common findings of inflammation—heat,red-
ness, swelling, and pain—easily identify superficial Once the abscess is properly drained,the prognosis
abscesses. Abscesses in other places may produce only is excellent for the condition itself. The reason for the
generalized symptoms such as fever and discomfort. If abscess (other diseases the patient has) will determine
the patient’s symptoms and physical examinationdo not the overall outcome. If, on the other hand, the abscess
help,a physician may have to resort to a battery of tests to ruptures into neighboring areas or permits the infectious
14 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
ssecbA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 14
agent to spill into the bloodstream,serious or fatal conse-
quences are likely. Abscesses in and around the nasal
sinuses,face,ears,and scalp may work their way into the
brain. Abscesses within an abdominal organ such as the
liver may rupture into the abdominal cavity. In either
case,the result is life threatening. Blood poisoningis a
term commonly used to describe an infection that has
spilled into the blood stream and spread throughout the
body from a localized origin. Blood poisoning,known to
physicians as septicemia,is also life threatening.
Of special note,abscesses in the hand are more seri-
ous than they might appear. Due to the intricate structure
and the overriding importance of the hand, any hand
infection must be treated promptly and competently.
Prevention
Infections that are treated early with heat (if superfi-
cial) or antibiotics will often resolve without the forma-
tion of an abscess. It is even better to avoid infections
altogether by taking prompt care of open injuries,partic-
ularly puncture wounds. Bites are the most dangerous of
all,even more so because they often occur on the hand.
Resources
BOOKS
Bennett,J. Claude,and Fred Plum,eds. Cecil Textbook of Med-
icine.Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed.
Stephen McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995.
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S. blood cells that were carried to the area to fight the infec-
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997. tion. Abscesses are often found in the soft tissue under
the skin,such as the armpit or the groin. However,they
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD may develop in any organ,and are commonly found in
the breast and gums. Abscesses are far more serious and
Abscess drainage see Abscess incision and call for more specific treatment if they are located in
drainage deep organs such as the lung,liver or brain.
Because the lining of the abscess cavity tends to
interfere with the amount of the drug that can penetrate
the source of infection from the blood,the cavity itself
may require draining. Once an abscess has fully formed,
Abscess incision & drainage it often does not respond to antibiotics. Even if the
antibiotic does penetrate into the abscess,it doesn’t func-
Definition tion as well in that environment.
An infected skin nodule that contains pus may need to
be drained via a cut if it does not respond to antibiotics.
Precautions
This allows the pus to escape,and the infection to heal.
An abscess can usually be diagnosed visually, al-
though an imaging technique such as a computed tomog-
Purpose
raphy scan may be used to confirm the extent of the
An abscessis a pus-filled sore,usually caused by a abscess before drainage. Such procedures may also be
bacterial infection. The pus is made up of both live and needed to localize internal abscesses,such as those in the
dead organisms and destroyed tissue from the white abdominal cavity or brain.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 15
Abcess
incision
&
drainage
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 15
Liver Spleen
Stomach
Common sites of abscess
above and below the liver Colon
Although abscesses are often found in the soft tissue under
the skin,such as the armpit or the groin,they may develop
in any organ,such as the liver.(Illustration by Electronic Illus-
trators Group.)
ORGANIZATIONS
KEY TERMS National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
Diseases. 9000 Rockville Pike,Bldg. 31,Rm 9A04,
Bethesda,MD 20892.
White blood cells—Cells that protect the body
against infection.
Carol A. Turkington
Description
A doctor will cut into the lining of the abscess,allow- Abuse
ing the pus to escape either through a drainage tube or by
leaving the cavity open to the skin. How big the incision Definition
is depends on how quickly the pus is encountered.
Abuse is defined as any thing that is harmful,injuri-
Once the abscess is opened, the doctor will clean ous, or offensive. Abuse also includes excessive and
and irrigate the wound thoroughly with saline. If it is not wrongful misuse of anything. There are several major types
too large or deep, the doctor may simply pack the of abuse:physical and sexual abuse of a child or an adult,
abscess wound with gauze for 24–48 hours to absorb the substance abuse,elderly abuse,and emotional abuse.
pus and discharge.
If it is a deeper abscess, the doctor may insert a
Description
drainage tube after cleaning out the wound. Once the tube is
in place,the surgeon closes the incision with simple stitch- Physical abuse of a child is the infliction of injury by
es,and applies a sterile dressing. Drainage is maintained for an other person. The injuries can include punching,kick-
several days to help prevent the abscess from reforming. ing,biting,burning,beating,or pulling the victim’s hair.
The physical abuse inflicted on a child can result in
Preparation bruises,burns,poisoning,broken bones,and internal
hemorrhages. Physical assault against an adult primarily
The skin over the abscess will be cleansed by swab-
occurs with women,usually in the form of domestic vio-
bing gently with an antiseptic solution.
lence. It is estimated that approximately three million
children witness domestic violence every year.
Aftercare
Sexual abuse of a child refers to sexual behavior
Much of the pain around the abscess will be gone
between an adult and child or between two children,one
after the surgery. Healing is usually very fast. After the
of whom is dominant or significantly older. The sexual
tube is taken out,antibiotics may be continued for sever-
behaviors can include touching breasts,genitals,and but-
al days. Applying heat and keeping the affected area ele-
tocks; either dressed or undressed. The behavior can also
vated may help relieve inflammation.
include exhibitionism,cunnilingus,fellatio,or penetra-
tion of the vagina or anus with sexual organs or objects.
Risks
Pornographic photography is also used in sexual
If there is any scarring,it is likely to become much abuse with children. Reported sex offenders are 97%
less noticeable as time goes on, and eventually almost male. Females are more often perpetrators in child-care
invisible. Occasionally,an abscess within a vital organ settings,since children may confuse sexual abuse by a
(such as the brain) damages enough surrounding tissue female with normal hygiene care. Sexual abuse by step-
that there is some permanent loss of normal function. fathers is five times more common than with biological
fathers. Sexual abuse of daughters by stepfathers or
Normal results fathers is the most common form of incest.
Most abscesses heal after drainage alone; others Sexual abuse can also take the form of rape. The
require drainage and antibiotic drug treatment. legal definition of rape includes only slight penile pene-
tration in the victim’s outer vulva area. Complete erec-
Resources tion and ejaculation are not necessary. Rape is the perpe-
tration of an act of sexual intercourse whether:
BOOKS
Turkington,Carol A.,and Jeffrey S. Dover. Skin Deep.New •will is overcome by force or fear (from threats or by use
York:Facts on File,1998. of drugs).
16 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esubA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 16
•mental impairment renders the victim incapable of
rational judgment. KEY TERMS
•if the victim is below the legal age established for con-
sent. Encopresis—Abnormalities relating to bowel move-
ments that can occur as a result of stress or fear.
Substance abuse is an abnormal pattern of substance
usage leading to significant distress or impairment. The
criteria include one or more of the following occurring
within a 12-month period:
ness than victims of stranger assault (mugging,robbery).
•recurrent substance use resulting in failure to fulfill
Physical abuse or rape can also occur between married
obligations at home,work,or school.
persons and persons of the same gender. Perpetrators usu-
•using substance in situations that are physically danger- ally sexually assault their victims to dominate,hurt,and
ous (i.e.,while driving). debase them. It is common for physical and sexual vio-
lence to occur at the same time. A large percentage of sex-
•recurrent substance-related legal problems.
ually assaulted persons were also physically abused in the
•continued usage despite recurrent social and interper-
form of punching,beating,or threatening the victim with
sonal problems (i.e.,arguments and fights with signifi-
a weapon such as a gun or knife. Usually males who are
cant other).
hurt and humiliated tend to physical assault persons
Abuse in the elderly is common and occurs mostly whom they are intimately involved with,such as spouses
as a result of caretaker burnout,due to the high level of and/or children. Males who assault a female tend to have
dependency frail,elderly patients usually require. Abuse experienced or witnessed violence during childhood.
can be manifested by physical signs,fear,and delaying They also tend to abuse alcohol,to be sexually assaultive,
or not reporting the need for advanced medical care. and are at increased risk for assaultive behavior directed
Elderly patients may also exhibit financial abuse (money against children. Jealous males tend to monitor the
or possessions taken away) and abandonment. women’s movements and whereabouts and to isolate
other sources of protection and support. They interpret
Emotional abuse generally continues even after phys-
their behavior as betrayal of trust and this causes resent-
ical assaults have stopped. In most cases it is a personally
ment and explosive anger outbursts during periods of los-
tailored form of verbal or gesture abuse expressed to illic-
ing control. Males may also use aggression against
it a provoked response.
females in an effort to control and intimidate partners.
Abuse in the elderly usually occurs in the frail,elderly
Causes and symptoms
community. The caretaker is usually the perpetrator. Care-
Children who have been abused usually have a variety taker abuse can be suspected if there is evidence suggest-
of symptoms that encompass behavioral,emotional,and ing behavioral changes in the elderly person when the
psychosomatic problems. Children who have been physi- caretaker is present. Additionally, elderly abuse can be
cally abused tend to be more aggressive, angry, hostile, possible if there are delays between injuries and treatment,
depressed, and have low self-esteem. Additionally, they inconsistencies between injury and explanations,lack of
exhibit fear,anxiety,and nightmares. Severe psychological hygiene or clothing,and prescriptions no being filled.
problems may result in suicidal behavior or posttraumatic
stressdisorder. Physically abused children may complain
Diagnosis
of physical illness even in the absence of a cause. They
may also suffer from eating disorders and encopresis. Chil- Children who are victims of domestic violence are
dren who are sexually abused may exhibit abnormal sexual frequently injured attempting to protect their mother
behavior in the form of aggressiveness and hyperarousal. from an abusive partner. Injuries are visible by inspection
Adolescents may display promiscuity,sexual acting out, or self-report. Physical abuse of an adult may be also be
and—in some situations—homosexual contact. evident by inspection with visible cuts and/or bruises or
self report.
Physical abuse directed towards adults can ultimately
lead to death. Approximately 50% of women murdered Sexual abuse of both a child and an adult can be
in the United States were killed by a former or current diagnosed with a history from the victim. Victims can be
male partner. Approximately one-third of emergency assessed for ejaculatory evidence from the perpetrator.
room consultations by women were prompted due to Ejaculatory specimens can be retrieved from the mouth,
domestic violence. Female victims who are married also rectum,and clothing. Tests for sexually transmitted dis-
have a higher rate of internal injuries and unconscious- easesmay be performed.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 17
Abuse
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 17
Elderly abuse can be suspected if the elderly patient tic behaviors may assist in some situations. In some
demonstrates a fear from the caretaker. Additionally, cases treatment may be sought before incident. The pro-
elderly abuse can be suspected if there are signs indicat- fessional treating the abused persons must develop a
ing intentional delay of required medical care or a clear sense of the relationship dynamics and the chances
change in medical status. for continued harm.
Substance abuse can be suspected in a person who
continues to indulge in their drug of choice despite recur- Resources
rent negative consequences. The diagnosis can be made
BOOKS
after administration of a comprehensive bio-psycho-
Behrman,Richard E.,et al,eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics.
social exam and standardized chemical abuse assess-
16th ed. W. B. Saunders Company,2000.
ments by a therapist. Duthie,Edmund H.,et al,eds. Practice of Geriatrics.3rd ed.
W. B. Saunders Company,1998.
Rosen,Peter. Emergency Medicine:Concepts and Clinical
Treatment
Practice.4th ed. Mosby-Year Book,Inc.,1998.
Children who are victims of physical or sexual abuse
PERIODICALS
typically require psychological support and medical atten-
Narendra,K.,and S. Lazoritz. “Physical Assessment:Evalua-
tion. A complaint may be filed with the local family social tion for Possible Physical and Sexual Abuse.”Pediatric
services that will initiate investigations. The authorities Clinics of North America45 (Feb. 1998).
will usually follow up the allegation or offense. Children Stringham,P. “Mental Health:Domestic Violence.”Primary
may also be referred for psychological evaluation and/or Care; Clinics in Office Practice26 (June 1999).
treatment. The victim may be placed in foster care pending
ORGANIZATIONS
the investigation outcome. The police may also investigate
National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect Informa-
physical and sexual abuse of an adult. The victim may
tion. 330 C Street SW,Washington,DC 20447. (800) 392-
require immediate medical care and long-term psychologi-
3366.
cal treatment. It is common for children to be adversely
affected by domestic violence situations and the local fam- OTHER
ily services agency may be involved. Elder Abuse Prevention. <http://www.oaktrees.org/elder>.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. <http://www.nida.nih.gov>.
Substance abusers should elect treatment,either inpa-
tient or outpatient, depending on severity of addiction.
Laith Farid Gulli,M.D.
Long term treatment and/or medications may be utilized to
Bilal Nasser,M.Sc.
assist in abstinence. The patient should be encouraged to
participate in community centered support groups.
Acceleration-deceleration cervical injury
see Whiplash
Prognosis
ACE inhibitors see Angiotensin-converting
The prognosis depends on the diagnosis. Usually enzyme inhibitors
victims of physical and sexual abuse require therapy to
deal with emotional distress associated with the incident.
Perpetrators require further psychological evaluation and
treatment. Victims of abuse may have a variety of emo-
tional problems including depression,acts of suicide,or
Acetaminophen
anxiety. Children of sexual abuse may as adults enter
abusive relationships or have problems with intimacy.
Definition
The substance abuser may experience relapses,since the
cardinal feature of all addictive disorders is a tendency to Acetaminophen is a medicine used to relieve pain
return to symptoms. Elderly patients may suffer from and reduce fever.
further medical problems and/or anxiety, and in some
cases neglect may precipitate death.
Purpose
Acetaminophen is used to relieve many kinds of
Prevention
minor aches and pains—headaches,muscle aches,back-
Prevention programs are geared to education and aches, toothaches, menstrual cramps, arthritis, and the
awareness. Detection of initial symptoms or characteris- aches and pains that often accompany colds.
18 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
nehponimatecA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 18
Description
KEY TERMS
This drug is available without a prescription. Aceta-
minophen—or APAP—is sold under various brand
Arthritis—Inflammation of the joints. The condi-
names,including Tylenol,Panadol,AspirinFree Anacin,
tion causes pain and swelling.
and Bayer Select Maximum Strength Headache Pain
Relief Formula. Many multi-symptom cold, flu, and Fatigue—Physical or mental weariness.
sinus medicines also contain acetaminophen. Check the
Inflammation—A response to irritation, infection,
ingredients listed on the container to see if aceta-
or injury, resulting in pain, redness, and swelling.
minophen is included in the product.
Studies have shown that acetaminophen relieves pain
and reduces fever about as well as aspirin. But differences
between these two common drugs exist. Acetaminophen Many drugs can interact with one another. Consult
is less likely than aspirin to irritate the stomach. However, a physician or pharmacist before combining aceta-
unlike aspirin,acetaminophen does not reduce the red- minophen with any other medicine. Do not use two
ness,stiffness,or swelling that accompany arthritis. different acetaminophen-containing products at the
same time.
Acetaminophen interferes with the results of some
Recommended dosage
medical tests. Before having medical tests done,check to
The usual dosage for adults and children age 12 and see whether taking acetaminophen will affect the results.
over is 325-650 mg every 4- 6 hours as needed. No more Avoiding the drug for a few days before the tests may be
than 4 grams (4000 mg) should be taken in 24 hours. necessary.
Because the drug can potentially harm the liver,people
who drink alcohol in large quantities should take consid-
Side effects
erably less acetaminophen and possibly should avoid the
drug completely. Acetaminophen causes few side effects. The most
common one is lightheadedness. Some people may
For children ages 6-11 years,the usual dose is 150-
experience trembling and pain in the side or the lower
300 mg,three to four times a day. Check with a physician
back. Allergic reactions do occur in some people,but
for dosages for children under age 6 years.
they are rare. Anyone who develops symptoms such as
a rash, swelling, or difficulty breathing after taking
Precautions acetaminophen should stop taking the drug and get
immediate medical attention. Other rare side effects
Never take more than the recommended dosage of
include yellow skin or eyes,unusual bleeding or bruis-
acetaminophen unless told to do so by a physician or
ing,weakness,fatigue,bloody or black stools,bloody
dentist.
or cloudy urine,and a sudden decrease in the amount
Patients should not use acetaminophen for more than of urine.
10 days to relieve pain (5 days for children) or for more
Overdoses of acetaminophen may cause nausea,
than 3 days to reduce fever,unless directed to do so by a
vomiting,sweating,and exhaustion. Very large overdoses
physician. If symptoms do not go away—or if they get
can cause liver damage. In case of an overdose, get
worse—contact a physician. Anyone who drinks three or
immediate medical attention.
more alcoholic beverages a day should check with a
physician before using this drug and should never take
more than the recommended dosage. A risk of liver dam- Interactions
age exists from combining large amounts of alcohol and
Acetaminophen may interact with a variety of other
acetaminophen. People who already have kidney or liver
medicines. When this happens,the effects of one or both
disease or liver infections should also consult with a
of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may
physician before using the drug. So should women who
be greater. Among the drugs that may interact with
are pregnant or breastfeeding.
acetaminophen are alcohol,nonsteroidal anti-inflam-
Smokingcigarettes may interfere with the effective- matory drugs(NSAIDs) such as Motrin,oral contra-
ness of acetaminophen. Smokers may need to take higher ceptives,the antiseizure drug phenytoin (Dilantin),the
doses of the medicine,but should not take more than the blood-thinning drug warfarin (Coumadin),the choles-
recommended daily dosage unless told by a physician to terol-lowering drug cholestyramine (Questran), the
do so. antibiotic Isoniazid, and zidovudine (Retrovir, AZT).
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 19
Acetaminophen
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 19
Check with a physician or pharmacist before combining are common. Symptoms usually get steadily worse. Other
acetaminophen with any other prescription or nonpre- symptoms may include nighttime cough or recurrent
scription (over-the-counter) medicine. pneumoniacaused by food passing into the lower airways.
Nancy Ross-Flanigan Diagnosis
Diagnosis of achalasia begins with a careful medical
Acetylsalicylic acid see Aspirin
history. The history should focus on the timing of symp-
toms and on eliminating other medical conditions that
may cause similar symptoms. Tests used to diagnose
achalasia include:
•Esophageal manometry. In this test, a thin tube is
Achalasia
passed into the esophagus to measure the pressure
exerted by the esophageal sphincter.
Definition
•X ray of the esophagus. Barium may be swallowed to
Achalasia is a disorder of the esophagus that pre-
act as a contrast agent. Barium reveals the outlines of
vents normal swallowing.
the esophagus in greater detail and makes it easier to
see its constriction at the sphincter.
Description
•Endoscopy. In this test,a tube containing a lens and a
Achalasia affects the esophagus,the tube that carries light source is passed into the esophagus. Endoscopy is
swallowed food from the back of the throat down into the used to look directly at the surface of the esophagus.
stomach. A ring of muscle called the lower esophageal This test can also detect tumors that cause symptoms
sphincter encircles the esophagus just above the entrance to like those of achalasia. Cancerof the esophagus occurs
the stomach. This sphincter muscle is normally contracted as a complication of achalasia in 2-7% of patients.
to close the esophagus. When the sphincter is closed,the
contents of the stomach cannot flow back into the esopha- Treatment
gus. Backward flow of stomach contents (reflux) can irri-
The first-line treatment for achalasia is balloon dila-
tate and inflame the esophagus,causing symptoms such as
tion. In this procedure,an inflatable membrane or bal-
heartburn. The act of swallowing causes a wave of
loon is passed down the esophagus to the sphincter and
esophageal contraction called peristalsis. Peristalsis pushes
inflated to force the sphincter open. Dilation is effective
food along the esophagus. Normally,peristalsis causes the
in about 70% of patients.
esophageal sphincter to relax and allow food into the stom-
ach. In achalasia, which means “failure to relax,” the Three other treatments are used for achalasia when
esophageal sphincter remains contracted. Normal peristal- balloon dilation is inappropriate or unacceptable.
sis is interrupted and food cannot enter the stomach.
•Botulinum toxin injection. Injected into the sphincter,
botulinum toxin paralyzes the muscle and allows it to
Causes and symptoms relax. Symptoms usually return within one to two years.
Causes •Esophagomyotomy. This surgical procedure cuts the
sphincter muscle to allow the esophagus to open.
Achalasia is caused by degeneration of the nerve
Esophagomyotomy is becoming more popular with the
cells that normally signal the brain to relax the
development of techniques allowing very small abdom-
esophageal sphincter. The ultimate cause of this degener-
inal incisions.
ation is unknown. Autoimmune disease or hidden infec-
•Drug therapy. Nifedipine,a calcium-channel blocker,
tion is suspected.
reduces muscle contraction. Taken daily,this drug pro-
vides relief for about two-thirds of patients for as long
Symptoms
as two years.
Dysphagia,or difficulty swallowing,is the most com-
mon symptom of achalasia. The person with achalasia usu-
Prognosis
ally has trouble swallowing both liquid and solid foods,
often feeling that food “gets stuck”on the way down. The Most patients with achalasia can be treated effective-
person has chest pain that is often mistaken for angina ly. Achalasia does not reduce life expectancy unless
pectoris (cardiac pain). Heartburn and difficulty belching esophageal carcinoma develops.
20 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aisalahcA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 20
KEY TERMS
Botulinum toxin—Any of a group of potent bacte-
rial toxins or poisons produced by different strains
of the bacterium Clostridium botulinum. The tox-
ins cause muscle paralysis.
Dysphagia—Difficulty in swallowing.
Endoscopy—A test in which a viewing device and
a light source are introduced into the esophagus by
means of a flexible tube. Endoscopy permits visual
inspection of the esophagus for abnormalities.
Esophageal manometry—A test in which a thin
tube is passed into the esophagus to measure the
degree of pressure exerted by the muscles of the
esophageal wall.
Esophageal sphincter—A circular band of muscle
that closes the last few centimeters of the esopha-
gus and prevents the backward flow of stomach
contents.
Esophagomyotomy—A surgical incision through
the muscular tissue of the esophagus.
Esophagus—The muscular tube that leads from the Description
back of the throat to the entrance of the stomach.
Achondroplasia is one of a number of chondodystro-
Peristalsis—The coordinated, rhythmic wave of phies,in which the development of cartilage,and there-
smooth muscle contraction that forces food fore,bone is disturbed. The disorder appears in approxi-
through the digestive tract. mately one in every 10,000 births. Achondroplasia is
Reflux—An abnormal backward or return flow of usually diagnosed at birth, owing to the characteristic
a fluid. appearance of the newborn.
Normal bone growth depends on the production of
cartilage (a fibrous connective tissue). Over time,calci-
um is deposited within the cartilage,causing it to hard-
Prevention
en and become bone. In achondroplasia,abnormalities
of this process prevent the bones (especially those in
There is no known way to prevent achalasia.
the limbs) from growing as long as they normally
should,at the same time allowing the bones to become
Resources
abnormally thickened. The bones in the trunk of the
BOOKS body and the skull are mostly not affected,although the
Grendell,James H.,Kenneth R. McQuaid,and Scott L. Fried- opening from the skull through which the spinal cord
man,eds. Current Diagnosis and Treatment in Gastroen- passes (foramen magnum) is often narrower than nor-
terology.Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1996.
mal,and the opening (spinal canal) through which the
spinal cord runs in the back bones (vertebrae) becomes
Richard Robinson
increasingly and abnormally small down the length of
the spine.
Achondroplasia Causes and symptoms
Achondroplasia is caused by a genetic defect. It is a
Definition
dominant trait, meaning that anybody with the genetic
Achondroplasia is the most common cause of defect will display all the symptoms of the disorder. A
dwarfism,or significantly abnormal short stature. parent with the disorder has a 50% chance of passing it
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 21
Achondroplasia
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 21
An x-ray image of an achondroplastic person’s head and
chest.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Diagnosis
KEY TERMS
Diagnosis is often made at birth due to the characteris-
tically short limbs,and the appearance of a large head. X-
Cartilage—A flexible, fibrous type of connective tis-
ray examination will reveal a characteristic appearance to
sue which serves as a base on which bone is built.
the bones,with the bones of the limbs appearing short in
Foramen magnum—The opening at the base of the length,yet broad in width. A number of measurements of
skull, through which the spinal cord and the brain- the bones in x-ray images will reveal abnormal proportions.
stem pass.
Hydrocephalus—An abnormal accumulation of Treatment
fluid within the brain. This accumulation can be
No treatment will reverse the defect present in achon-
destructive by pressing on brain structures, and
droplasia. All patients with the disease will be short,with
damaging them.
abnormally proportioned limbs,trunk,and head. Treat-
Mutation—A new, permanent change in the struc- ment of achondroplasia primarily addresses some of the
ture of a gene, which can result in abnormal struc- complications of the disorder,including problems due to
ture or function somewhere in the body. nerve compression, hydrocephalus, bowed legs, and
Spinal canal—The opening that runs through the abnormal curves in the spine. Children with achondropla-
center of the column of spinal bones (vertebrae), sia who develop middle ear infections (acute otitis
and through which the spinal cord passes. media) will require quick treatment with antibioticsand
careful monitoring in order to avoid hearing loss.
Vertebrae—The individual bones of the spinal col-
umn which are stacked on top of each other. There
is a hole in the center of each bone, through Prognosis
which the spinal cord passes.
Achondroplasia is a disease which causes consider-
able deformity. However,with careful attention paid to
the development of dangerous complications (nerve
compression,hydrocephalus),most people are in good
on to the offspring. Although achondroplasia can be
health,and can live a normal lifespan.
passed on to subsequent offspring,the majority of cases
occur due to a new mutation (change) in a gene. Interest-
Prevention
ingly enough,the defect seen in achondroplasia is one of
only a few defects known to increase in frequency with The only form of prevention is through genetic
increasing age of the father (many genetic defects are counseling,which could help parents assess their risk of
linked to increased age of the mother). having a child with achondroplasia.
People with achondroplasia have abnormally short
Resources
arms and legs. Their trunk is usually of normal size,as is
BOOKS
their head. The appearance of short limbs and normal
Hall,Bryan D. “Achondroplasia.”In Nelson Textbook of Pedi-
head size actually makes the head appear to be oversized.
atrics,ed. Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B. Saun-
The bridge of the nose often has a scooped out appear-
ders Co.,1996.
ance termed “saddle nose.”The lower back has an abnor-
Horton,W. A.,and J. T. Hecht. “The Chondrodysplasias.”In
mal curvature,or sway back. The face often displays an
Connective Tissue and Its Heritable Disorders,ed. R. M.
overly prominent forehead,and a relative lack of devel- Royce and B. Steinmann. Somerset,NJ:Wiley-Liss,1993.
opment of the face in the area of the upper jaw. Because Krane,Stephen M.,and Alan L. Schiller. “Achondroplasia.”In
the foramen magnum and spinal canal are abnormally Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony
narrowed,nerve damage may occur if the spinal cord or S. Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
nerves become compressed. The narrowed foramen mag- Whyte,Michael,P. “Achondroplasia.”In Cecil Textbook of
num may disrupt the normal flow of fluid between the Medicine,ed. J. Claude Bennett and Fred Plum. Philadel-
phia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1996.
brain and the spinal cord,resulting in the accumulation
of too much fluid in the brain (hydrocephalus). Children ORGANIZATIONS
with achondroplasia have a very high risk of serious and Little People of America,c/o Mary Carten. 7238 Piedmont
repeated middle ear infections,which can result in hear- Drive,Dallas,TX 75227-9324. (800) 243-9273.
ing loss. The disease does not affect either mental capac-
ity,or reproductive ability. Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
22 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aisalpordnohcA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 22
Achromatopsia see Color blindness
KEY TERMS
Acid indigestion see Heartburn
Enzyme—A substance needed to trigger specific
chemical reactions.
Metastasize—Spread to other parts of the body;
usually refers to cancer.
Acid phosphatase test
Prostate gland—A gland of the male reproductive
Definition system.
Acid phosphatase is an enzyme found throughout
the body, but primarily in the prostate gland. Like all
enzymes,it is needed to trigger specific chemical reac-
Subtle differences between prostatic acid phos-
tions. Acid phosphatase testing is done to diagnose
phatase and acid phosphatases from other tissues cause
whether prostate cancerhas spread to other parts of the
them to react differently in the laboratory when mixed
body (metastasized), and to check the effectiveness of
with certain chemicals. For example,adding the chemi-
treatment. The test has been largely supplanted by the
cal tartrate to the test mixture inhibits the activity of pro-
prostate specific antigen test (PSA).
static acid phosphatase but not red blood cell acid phos-
phatase. Laboratory test methods based on these differ-
Purpose ences reveal how much of a person’s total acid phos-
phatase is derived from the prostate. Results are usually
The male prostate gland has 100 times more acid
available the next day.
phosphatase than any other body tissue. When prostate
cancer spreads to other parts of the body, acid phos-
Preparation
phatase levels rise,particularly if the cancer spreads to
the bone. One-half to three-fourths of persons who have This test requires drawing about 5-10 mL of blood.
metastasized prostate cancer have high acid phosphatase The patient should not have a rectal exam or prostate
levels. Levels fall after the tumor is removed or reduced massage for two to three days prior to the test.
through treatment.
Tissues other than prostate have small amounts of Aftercare
acid phosphatase,including bone,liver,spleen,kidney, Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture
and red blood cells and platelets. Damage to these tissues site, and the person may feel dizzy or faint. Applying
causes a moderate increase in acid phosphatase levels. pressure to the puncture site until the bleeding stops will
Acid phosphatase is very concentrated in semen. reduce bruising. Warm packs to the puncture site will
Rape investigations will often include testing for the relieve discomfort.
presence of acid phosphatase in vaginal fluid.
Normal results
Precautions
Normal results vary based on the laboratory and the
This is not a screening test for prostate cancer. Acid method used.
phosphatase levels rise only after prostate cancer has
metastasized. Abnormal results
The highest levels of acid phosphatase are found in
Description
metastasized prostate cancer. Diseases of the bone,such
as Paget’s disease or hyperparathyroidism; diseases of
Laboratory testing measures the amount of acid
blood cells, such as sickle cell disease or multiple
phosphatase in a person’s blood,and can determine from
myeloma; or lysosomal disorders,such as Gaucher’s dis-
what tissue the enzyme is coming. For example, it is
ease,will show moderately increased levels.
important to know if the increased acid phosphatase is
from the prostate or red blood cells. Acid phosphatase Certain medications can cause temporary increases
from the prostate, called prostatic acid phosphatase or decreases in acid phosphatase levels. Manipulation of
(PAP), is the most medically significant type of acid the prostate gland through massage, biopsy, or rectal
phosphatase. exam before a test can increase the level.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 23
Acid
phosphatase
test
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 23
Resources skin. A pimple forms when the damaged follicle weakens
and bursts open,releasing sebum,bacteria,and skin and
BOOKS
white blood cells into the surrounding tissues. Inflamed
A Manual of Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests.5th ed. Ed.
pimples near the skin’s surface are called papules; when
Francis Fishback. Philadelphia:Lippincott,1996.
deeper,they are called pustules. The most severe type of
Garza,Diana,and Kathleen Becan-McBride. Phlebotomy
Handbook.4th ed. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1996. acne consists of cysts (closed sacs) and nodules (hard
swellings). Scarring occurs when new skin cells are laid
PERIODICALS
down to replace damaged cells.
Moul,Judd W.,et al. “The Contemporary Value of Pretreat-
ment Prostatic Acid Phosphatase to Predict Pathological The most common sites of acne are the face,chest,
Stage and Recurrence in Radical Prostatectomy Cases.” shoulders,and back since these are the parts of the body
Journal of Urology(Mar. 1998):935-940. where the most sebaceous follicles are found.
Nancy J. Nordenson
Causes and symptoms
Acid reflux see Heartburn The exact cause of acne is unknown. Several risk
factors have been identified:
Acidosis see Respiratory acidosis; Renal
•Age. Due to the hormonal changes they experience,
tubular acidosis; Metabolic acidosis
teenagers are more likely to develop acne.
•Gender. Boys have more severe acne and develop it
more often than girls.
•Disease. Hormonal disorders can complicate acne in
Acne girls.
•Heredity. Individuals with a family history of acne have
Definition
greater susceptibility to the disease.
Acne is a common skin disease characterized by
•Hormonal changes. Acne can flare up before menstrua-
pimples on the face,chest,and back. It occurs when the
tion,during pregnancy,and menopause.
pores of the skin become clogged with oil, dead skin
•Diet. No foods cause acne,but certain foods may cause
cells,and bacteria.
flare-ups.
•Drugs. Acne can be a side effect of drugs including
Description
tranquilizers,antidepressants,antibiotics,oral contra-
Acne vulgaris,the medical term for common acne,is ceptives,and anabolic steroids.
the most common skin disease. It affects nearly 17 million
•Personal hygiene. Abrasive soaps,hard scrubbing,or
people in the United States. While acne can arise at any
picking at pimples will make them worse.
age,it usually begins at pubertyand worsens during ado-
lescence. Nearly 85% of people develop acne at some time •Cosmetics. Oil-based makeup and hair sprays worsen
between the ages of 12-25 years. Up to 20% of women acne.
develop mild acne. It is also found in some newborns. •Environment. Exposure to oils and greases,polluted air,
The sebaceous glands lie just beneath the skin’s sur- and sweating in hot weather aggravate acne.
face. They produce an oil called sebum,the skin’s natural •Stress. Emotional stress may contribute to acne.
moisturizer. These glands and the hair follicles within
Acne is usually not conspicuous,although inflamed
which they are found are called sebaceous follicles.
lesions may cause pain,tenderness,itching,or swelling.
These follicles open onto the skin through pores. At
The most troubling aspects of these lesions are the nega-
puberty,increased levels of androgens (male hormones)
tive cosmetic effects and potential for scarring. Some
cause the glands to produce too much sebum. When
people,especially teenagers,become emotionally upset
excess sebum combines with dead, sticky skin cells, a
about their condition,and have problems forming rela-
hard plug,or comedo,forms that blocks the pore. Mild
tionships or keeping jobs.
noninflammatory acne consists of the two types of come-
dones,whiteheads and blackheads.
Diagnosis
Moderate and severe inflammatory types of acne
result after the plugged follicle is invaded by Propioni- Acne patients are often treated by family doctors.
bacterium acnes, a bacteria that normally lives on the Complicated cases are referred to a dermatologist,a skin
24 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
encA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 24
disease specialist,or an endocrinologist,a specialist who
treats diseases of the body’s endocrine (hormones and
glands) system.
Acne has a characteristic appearance and is not diffi-
cult to diagnose. The doctor takes a complete medical
history,including questions about skin care,diet,factors
causing flare-ups,medication use,and prior treatment.
Physical examination includes the face, upper neck,
chest,shoulders,back,and other affected areas. Under
good lighting,the doctor determines what types and how
many blemishes are present,whether they are inflamed,
whether they are deep or superficial,and whether there is
scarring or skin discoloration.
In teenagers, acne is often found on the forehead,
nose,and chin. As people get older,acne tends to appear
towards the outer part of the face. Adult women may
have acne on their chins and around their mouths. The
elderly may develop whiteheads and blackheads on the
upper cheeks and skin around the eyes.
Laboratory tests are not done unless the patient
appears to have a hormonal disorder or other medical
problem. In this case,blood analyses or other tests may
be ordered. Most insurance plans cover the costs of diag-
nosing and treating acne.
Treatment
Acne treatment consists of reducing sebum produc-
tion,removing dead skin cells,and killing bacteria with
topical drugs and oral medications. Treatment choice
depends upon whether the acne is mild, moderate, or
severe.
Drugs
TOPICAL DRUGS. Treatment for mild noninflamma- mycin), are also used. These drugs may be used for
tory acne consists of reducing the formation of new months to years to achieve disease control.
comedones with topical tretinoin,benzoyl peroxide,ada-
After washing with mild soap,the drugs are applied
palene,or salicylic acid. Tretinoin is especially effective
alone or in combination, once or twice a day over the
because it increases turnover (deathand replacement) of
entire affected area of skin. Possible side effects include
skin cells. When complicated by inflammation,topical
mild redness,peeling,irritation,dryness,and an increased
antibiotics may be added to the treatment regimen.
sensitivity to sunlight that requires use of a sunscreen.
Improvement is usually seen in two to four weeks.
ORAL DRUGS. Oral antibiotics are taken daily for
Topical medications are available as cream, gel,
two to four months. The drugs used include tetracycline,
lotion, or pad preparations of varying strengths. They
erythromycin,minocycline (Minocin),doxycycline,clin-
include antibiotics (agents that kill bacteria),such as ery-
damycin (Cleocin),and trimethoprim- sulfamethoxazole
thromycin,clindamycin (Cleocin-T),and meclocycline
(Bactrim,Septra). Possible side effects include allergic
(Meclan); comedolytics (agents that loosen hard plugs
reactions,stomach upset,vaginal yeast infections,dizzi-
and open pores) such as the vitamin A acid tretinoin
ness,and tooth discoloration.
(Retin-A),salicylic acid,adapalene (Differin),resorci-
nol,and sulfur. Drugs that act as both comedolytics and The goal of treating moderate acne is to decrease
antibiotics, such as benzoyl peroxide, azelaic acid inflammation and prevent new comedone formation. One
(Azelex),or benzoyl peroxide plus erythromycin (Benza- effective treatment is topical tretinoin along with a topical
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 25
Acne
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 25
Acne vulgaris affecting a woman’s face.Acne is the general
name given to a skin disorder in which the sebaceous
glands become inflamed.(Photograph by Biophoto Associ-
ates, Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
example, Ortho-Tri-Cyclen) and female sex hormones
KEY TERMS (estrogens) reduce hormone activity in the ovaries. Other
drugs,for example,spironolactone and corticosteroids,
Androgens—Male sex hormones that are linked reduce hormone activity in the adrenal glands. Improve-
with the development of acne. ment may take up to four months.
Antiandrogens—Drugs that inhibit the production Oral corticosteroids,or anti-inflammatory drugs,are
of androgens. the treatment of choice for an extremely severe,but rare
type of destructive inflammatory acne called acne fulmi-
Antibiotics—Medicines that kill bacteria.
nans,found mostly in adolescent males. Acne congloba-
Comedo—A hard plug composed of sebum and ta,a more common form of severe inflammation,is char-
dead skin cells. The mildest type of acne. acterized by numerous,deep,inflammatory nodules that
Comedolytic—Drugs that break up comedones heal with scarring. It is treated with oral isotretinoin and
and open clogged pores. corticosteroids.
Corticosteroids—A group of hormones produced
Other treatments
by the adrenal glands with different functions,
including regulation of fluid balance, androgen Several surgical or medical treatments are available
activity, and reaction to inflammation. to alleviate acne or the resulting scars:
Estrogens—Hormones produced by the ovaries, •Comedone extraction. The comedo is removed from the
the female sex glands. pore with a special tool.
Isotretinoin—A drug that decreases sebum pro- •Chemical peels. Glycolic acid is applied to peel off the
duction and dries up acne pimples. top layer of skin to reduce scarring.
Sebaceous follicles—A structure found within the •Dermabrasion. The affected skin is frozen with a chem-
skin that houses the oil-producing glands and hair ical spray,and removed by brushing or planing.
follicles, where pimples form.
•Punch grafting. Deep scars are excised and the area
Sebum—An oily skin moisturizer produced by repaired with small skin grafts.
sebaceous glands.
•Intralesional injection. Corticosteroids are injected
Tretinoin—A drug that works by increasing the directly into inflamed pimples.
turnover (death and replacement) of skin cells.
•Collagen injection. Shallow scars are elevated by colla-
gen (protein) injections.
or oral antibiotic. A combination of topical benzoyl per- Alternative treatment
oxide and erythromycin is also very effective. Improve-
Alternative treatments for acne focus on proper
ment is normally seen within four to six weeks,but treat-
cleansing to keep the skin oil-free; eating a well-bal-
ment is maintained for at least two to four months.
anced diet high in fiber,zinc,and raw foods; and avoid-
A drug reserved for the treatment of severe acne,oral
ing alcohol, dairy products, smoking, caffeine,
isotretinoin (Accutane), reduces sebum production and
sugar,processed foods,and foods high in iodine,such as
cell stickiness. It is the treatment of choice for severe acne
salt. Supplementation with herbs such as burdock root
with cysts and nodules,and is used with or without topical
(Arctium lappa), red clover (Trifolium pratense), and
or oral antibiotics. Taken for four to five months,it pro-
milk thistle (Silybum marianum),and with nutrients such
vides long-term disease control in up to 60% of patients. If
as essential fatty acids,vitamin B complex,zinc,vitamin
the acne reappears,another course of isotretinoin may be
A,and chromium is also recommended. Chinese herbal
needed by about 20% of patients,while another 20% may
remedies used for acne include cnidium seed (Cnidium
do well with topical drugs or oral antibiotics. Side effects
monnieri) and honeysuckle flower (Lonicera japonica).
include temporary worsening of the acne,dry skin,nose-
Wholistic physicians or nutritionists can recommend the
bleeds,vision disorders,and elevated liver enzymes,blood
proper amounts of these herbs.
fats and cholesterol. This drug must not be taken during
pregnancy since it causes birth defects.
Prognosis
Anti-androgens,drugs that inhibit androgen produc-
tion, are used to treat women who are unresponsive to Acne is not curable, although long-term control is
other therapies. Certain types of oral contraceptives (for achieved in up to 60% of patients treated with
26 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
encA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 26
isotretinoin. It can be controlled by proper treatment, ORGANIZATIONS
with improvement taking two or more months. Acne American Academy of Dermatology. 930 N. Meacham Road,
tends to reappear when treatment stops,but spontaneous- P.O. Box 4014,Schaumburg,IL 60168-4014. (847) 330-
ly improves over time. Inflammatory acne may leave 0230. <http://www.aad.org>.
scars that require further treatment.
Mercedes McLaughlin
Prevention
Acne rosacea see Rosacea
There are no sure ways to prevent acne,but the fol-
Acoustic neurinoma see Acoustic neuroma
lowing steps may be taken to minimize flare-ups:
•gentle washing of affected areas once or twice every day
•avoid abrasive cleansers
•use noncomedogenic makeup and moisturizers
•shampoo often and wear hair off face Acoustic neuroma
•eat a well-balanced diet, avoiding foods that trigger
Definition
flare-ups
An acoustic neuroma is a benign tumor involving
•unless told otherwise, give dry pimples a limited
cells of the myelin sheath that surrounds the vestibulo-
amount of sun exposur
cochlear nerve (eighth cranial nerve).
•do not pick or squeeze blemishes
•reduce stress
Description
The vestibulocochlear nerve extends from the inner
Resources
ear to the brain and is made up of a vestibular branch,
BOOKS often called the vestibular nerve,and a cochlear branch,
Balch,James F.,and Phyllis A. Balch. “The Disorders:Acne.”
called the cochlear nerve. The vestibular and cochlear
In Prescription for Nutritional Healing,ed. Amy C. Teck-
nerves lie next to one another. They also run along side
lenburg,et al. New York:Avery Publishing Group,1997.
other cranial nerves. People possess two of each type of
Bark,Joseph P. Your Skin:An Owner’s Guide.Englewood
vestibulocochlear nerve,one that extends from the left
Cliffs,NJ:Prentice Hall,1995.
ear and one that extends from the right ear.
Goldstein,Sanford M.,and Richard B. Odom. “Skin &
Appendages:Pustular Disorders.”In Current Medical The vestibular nerve transmits information concern-
Diagnosis and Treatment,1996.35th ed. Ed. Stephen ing balance from the inner ear to the brain and the cochlear
McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1995.
nerve transmits information about hearing. The vestibular
Kaptchuk,Ted J.,Z’ev Rosenberg,and K’an Herb Co.,Inc.
nerve,like many nerves,is surrounded by a cover called a
K’an Herbals:Formulas by Ted Kaptchuk,O.M.D.San
myelin sheath. A tumor,called a schwannoma,can some-
Francisco:Andrew Miller,1996.
times develop from the cells of the myelin sheath. A tumor
PERIODICALS is an abnormal growth of tissue that results from the
“Adult Acne.”Harvard Women’s Health Watch(Mar. 1995):4- uncontrolled growth of cells. Acoustic neuromas are often
5.
called vestibular schwannomas because they are tumors
Bergfeld,Wilma F. “The Evaluation and Management of Acne:
that arise from the myelin sheath that surrounds the
Economic Considerations.”Journal of the American
vestibular nerve. Acoustic neuromas are considered
Academy of Dermatology32 (1995):S52-6.
benign (non-cancerous) tumors since they do not spread to
Billings,Laura. “Getting Clear.”Health Magazine,Apr. 1997,
other parts of the body. They can occur anywhere along
48-52.
Christiano,Donna. “Acne Treatment Meant for Grown- Ups.” the vestibular nerve but are most likely to occur where the
American Health(Oct. 1994):23-4. vestibulocochlear nerve passes through the tiny bony canal
“Clearly Better New Treatments Help Adult Acne.”Prevention that connects the brain and the inner ear.
Magazine,Aug. 1997,50-51.
An acoustic neuroma can arise from the left vestibu-
Leyden,James J. “Therapy For Acne Vulgaris.”New England
lar nerve or the right vestibular nerve. A unilateral tumor
Journal of Medicine17 (Apr. 1997):1156-1162.
is a tumor arising from one nerve and a bilateral tumor
Nguyen,Quan H.,Y. Alyssa Kim,and Robert A. Schwartz.
“Management of Acne Vulgaris.”American Family Physi- arises from both vestibular nerves. Unilateral acoustic
cian(July 1994):89-96. neuromas usually occur spontaneously (by chance). Bilat-
“Pimple Control Pill?”Prevention Magazine,May 1997,132. eral acoustic neuromas occur as part of a hereditary con-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 27
Acoustic
neuroma
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 27
dition called NeurofibromatosisType 2 (NF2). A person A person with NF2 will develop an acoustic neuro-
with NF2 has inherited a predisposition for developing ma if the remaining unchanged NF2 gene becomes spon-
acoustic neuromas and other tumors of the nerve cells. taneously changed or missing in one of the myelin sheath
cells of their vestibular nerve. People with NF2 often
Acoustic neuromas usually grow slowly and can
develop acoustic neuromas at a younger age. The mean
take years to develop. Some acoustic neuromas remain
age of onset of acoustic neuroma in NF2 is 31 years of
so small that they do not cause any symptoms. As the
age versus 50 years of age for sporadic acoustic neuro-
acoustic neuroma grows it can interfere with the func-
mas. Not all people with NF2,however,develop acoustic
tioning of the vestibular nerve and can cause vertigo and
neuromas. People with NF2 are at increased risk for
balance difficulties. If the acoustic nerve grows large
developing cataractsand tumors in other nerve cells.
enough to press against the cochlear nerve,then hearing
lossand a ringing (tinnitus) in the affected ear will usu- Most people with a unilateral acoustic neuroma are
ally occur. If untreated and the acoustic neuroma contin- not affected with NF2. Some people with NF2,however,
ues to grow it can press against other nerves in the region only develop a tumor in one of the vestibulocochlear
and cause other symptoms. This tumor can be life threat- nerves. Others may initially be diagnosed with a unilater-
ening if it becomes large enough to press against and al tumor but may develop a tumor in the other nerve a
interfere with the functioning of the brain. number of years later. NF2 should be considered in some-
one under the age of 40 who has a unilateral acoustic neu-
roma. Someone with a unilateral acoustic neuroma and
Causes and symptoms other family members diagnosed with NF2 probably is
affected with NF2. Someone with a unilateral acoustic
Causes
neuroma and other symptoms of NF2 such as cataracts
An acoustic neuroma is caused by a change or and other tumors may also be affected with NF2. On the
absence of both of the NF2 tumor suppressor genes in a other hand,someone over the age of 50 with a unilateral
nerve cell. Every person possesses a pair of NF2 genes in acoustic neuroma,no other tumors and no family history
every cell of their body including their nerve cells. One of NF2 is very unlikely to be affected with NF2.
NF2 gene is inherited from the egg cell of the mother and
one NF2 gene is inherited from the sperm cell of the
Symptoms
father. The NF2 gene is responsible for helping to pre-
vent the formation of tumors in the nerve cells. In partic- Small acoustic neuromas usually only interfere with
ular the NF2 gene helps to prevent acoustic neuromas. the functioning of the vestibulocochlear nerve. The most
common first symptom of an acoustic neuroma is hearing
Only one unchanged and functioning NF2 gene is
loss,which is often accompanied by a ringing sound (tin-
necessary to prevent the formation of an acoustic neuro-
nitis). People with acoustic neuromas sometimes report
ma. If both NF2 genes become changed or missing in
difficulties in using the phone and difficulties in perceiving
one of the myelin sheath cells of the vestibular nerve
the tone of a musical instrument or sound even when their
then an acoustic neuroma will usually develop. Most uni-
hearing appears to be otherwise normal. In most cases the
lateral acoustic neuromas result when the NF2 genes
hearing loss is initially subtle and worsens gradually over
become spontaneously changed or missing. Someone
time until deafness occurs in the affected ear. In approxi-
with a unilateral acoustic neuroma that has developed
mately 10% of cases the hearing loss is sudden and severe.
spontaneously is not at increased risk for having children
with an acoustic neuroma. Some unilateral acoustic neu- Acoustic neuromas can also affect the functioning of
romas result from the hereditary condition NF2. It is also the vestibular branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve and
possible that some unilateral acoustic neuromas may be van cause vertigo and dysequilibrium. Twenty percent of
caused by changes in other genes responsible for pre- small tumors are associated with periodic vertigo,which
venting the formation of tumors. is characterized by dizziness or a whirling sensation.
Larger acoustic neuromas are less likely to cause vertigo
Bilateral acoustic neuromas result when someone is
but more likely to cause dysequilibrium. Dysequilibrium,
affected with the hereditary condition NF2. A person with
which is characterized by minor clumsiness and a gener-
NF2 is typically born with one unchanged and one
al feeling of instability,occurs in nearly 50% of people
changed or missing NF2 gene in every cell of their body.
with an acoustic neuroma.
Sometimes they inherit this change from their mother or
father. Sometimes the change occurs spontaneously when As the tumor grows larger it can press on the surround-
the egg and sperm come together to form the first cell of ing cranial nerves. Compression of the fifth cranial nerve
the baby. The children of a person with NF2 have a 50% can result in facial painand or numbness. Compression of
chance of inheriting the changed or missing NF2 gene. the seventh cranial nerve can cause spasms,weakness or
28 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amoruen
citsuocA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 28
KEY TERMS
Benign tumor—A localized overgrowth of cells that uses an external magnetic field instead of x rays to
does not spread to other parts of the body. visualize different tissues of the body.
Chromosome—A microscopic structure, made of a Myelin sheath—The cover that surrounds many
complex of proteins and DNA, that is found within nerve cells and helps to increase the speed by
each cell of the body. which information travels along the nerve.
Computed tomography (CT)—An examination that Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2)—A hereditary
uses a computer to compile and analyze the images condition associated with an increased risk of bilat-
produced by x rays projected at a particular part of eral acoustic neuromas, other nerve cell tumors and
the body. cataracts.
Cranial nerves—The set of twelve nerves found on
Protein—A substance produced by a gene that is
each side of the head and neck that control the sen-
involved in creating the traits of the human body
sory and muscle functions of a number of organs
such as hair and eye color or is involved in control-
such as the eyes, nose, tongue face and throat.
ling the basic functions of the human body.
DNA testing—Testing for a change or changes in a
Schwannoma—A tumor derived from the cells of
gene or genes.
the myelin sheath that surrounds many nerve cells.
Gene—A building block of inheritance, made up of
Tinnitus—A ringing sound or other noise in the ear.
a compound called DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
and containing the instructions for the production Vertigo—A feeling of spinning or whirling.
of a particular protein. Each gene is found on a spe-
Vestibulocochlear nerve (Eighth cranial nerve)—
cific location on a chromosome.
Nerve that transmits information, about hearing and
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—A test which balance from the ear to the brain.
paralysis of the facial muscles. Double vision is a rare are two screening tests that are often used to evaluate hear-
symptom but can result when the 6th cranial nerve is affect- ing. Pure tone audiometry tests to see how well someone
ed. Swallowing and/or speaking difficulties can occur if the can hear tones of different volume and pitch and speech
tumor presses against the 9th,10th,or 12th cranial nerves. audiometry tests to see how well someone can hear and
recognize speech. An acoustic neuroma is suspected in
If left untreated,the tumor can become large enough
someone with unilateral hearing loss or hearing loss that is
to press against and affect the functioning of the brain
less severe in one ear than the other ear(asymmetrical).
stem. The brain stem is the stalk like portion of the brain
that joins the spinal cord to the cerebrum,the thinking and
Sometimes an auditory brainstem response (ABR,
reasoning part of the brain. Different parts of the brain-
BAER) test is performed to help establish whether
stem have different functions such as the control of breath-
someone is likely to have an acoustic neuroma. During
ing and muscle coordination. Large tumors that impact the
the ABR examination,a harmless electrical impulse is
brain stem can result in headaches, walking difficulties
passed from the inner ear to the brainstem. An acoustic
(gait ataxia) and involuntary shaking movements of the
neuroma can interfere with the passage of this electri-
muscles (tremors). In rare cases when an acoustic neuro-
cal impulse and this interference can, sometimes be
ma remains undiagnosed and untreated it can cause nau-
identified through the ABR evaluation. A normal ABR
sea,vomiting,lethargy and eventually coma,respiratory
examination does not rule out the possibility of an
difficulties and death. In the vast majority of cases,how-
acoustic neuroma. An abnormal ABR examination
ever,the tumor is discovered and treated long before it is
increases the likelihood that an acoustic neuroma is
large enough to cause such serious manifestations.
present but other tests are necessary to confirm the
presence of a tumor.
Diagnosis
If an acoustic neuroma is strongly suspected then
Anyone with symptoms of hearing loss should under- magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is usually per-
go hearing evaluations. Pure tone and speech audiometry formed. The MRI is a very accurate evaluation that is
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 29
Acoustic
neuroma
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 29
able to detect nearly 100% of acoustic neuromas. Com- Stereotactic Radiation therapy
puterized tomography (CT scan,CAT scan)is unable to
During stereotactic radiation therapy,also called
identify smaller tumors; but it can be used when an
radiosurgery or radiotherapy,many small beams of radia-
acoustic neuroma is suspected and an MRI evaluation
tion are aimed directly at the acoustic neuroma. The radi-
cannot be performed.
ation is administered in a single large dose,under local
Once an acoustic neuroma is diagnosed,an evalua- anesthetic and is performed on an outpatient basis. This
tion by genetic specialists such as a geneticist and genet- results in a high dose of radiation to the tumor but little
ic counselor may be recommended. The purpose of this radiation exposure to the surrounding area. This treat-
evaluation is to obtain a detailed family history and ment approach is limited to small or medium tumors.
check for signs of NF2. If NF2 is strongly suspected The goal of the surgery is to cause tumor shrinkage or at
then DNA testing may be recommended. DNA testing least limit the growth of the tumor. The long term effica-
involves checking the blood cells obtained from a rou- cy and risks of this treatment approach are not known.
tine blood draw for the common gene changes associat- Periodic MRI monitoring throughout the life of the
ed with NF2. patient is therefore recommended.
Radiation therapy can cause hearing loss which can
Treatment sometimes occurs even years later. Radiation therapy can
also cause damage to neighboring cranial nerves,which
The three treatment options for acoustic neuroma
can result in symptoms such as numbness,pain or paralysis
are surgery, radiation, and observation. The physician
of the facial muscles. In many cases these symptoms are
and patient should discuss the pros and cons of the differ-
temporary. Radiation treatment can also induce the forma-
ent options prior to making a decision about treatment.
tion of other benign or malignant schwannomas. This type
The patient’s, physical health, age, symptoms, tumor
of treatment may therefore be contraindicated in the treat-
size,and tumor location should be considered.
ment of acoustic neuromas in those with NF2 who are pre-
disposed to developing schwannomas and other tumors.
Microsurgery
The surgical removal of the tumor or tumors is the Observation
most common treatment for acoustic neuroma. In most
Acoustic neuromas are usually slow growing and in
cases the entire tumor is removed during the surgery. If
some cases they will stop growing and even become
the tumor is large and causing significant symptoms,yet
smaller or disappear entirely. It may therefore be appro-
there is a need to preserve hearing in that ear,then only
priate in some cases to hold off on treatment and to peri-
part of the tumor may be removed. During the procedure
odically monitor the tumor through MRI evaluations.
the tumor is removed under microscopic guidance and
Long-term observation may be appropriate for example
general anesthetic. Monitoring of the neighboring cranial
in an elderly person with a small acoustic neuroma and
nerves is done during the procedure so that damage to
few symptoms. Periodic observation may also be indicat-
these nerves can be prevented. If preservation of hearing
ed for someone with a small and asymptomatic acoustic
is a possibility,then monitoring of hearing will also take
neuroma that was detected through an evaluation for
place during the surgery.
another medical problem. Observation may also be sug-
Most people stay in the hospital four to seven days gested for someone with an acoustic neuroma in the only
following the surgery. Total recovery usually takes four hearing ear or in the ear that has better hearing. The dan-
to six weeks. Most people experience fatigueand head ger of an observational approach is that as the tumor
discomfort following the surgery. Problems with balance grows larger it can become more difficult to treat.
and head and neck stiffness are also common. The mor-
tality rate of this type of surgery is less than 2% at most
Prognosis
major centers. Approximately 20% of patients experi-
ence some degree of post-surgical complications. In most The prognosis for someone with a unilateral acoustic
cases these complications can be managed successfully neuroma is usually quite good provided the tumor is diag-
and do not result in long term medical problems. Surgery nosed early and appropriate treatment is instituted. Long
brings with it a risk of stroke,damage to the brain stem, term hearing loss and tinnitis in the affected ear are com-
infection,leakage of spinal fluid and damage to the cra- mon,even if appropriate treatment is provided. Regrowth of
nial nerves. Hearing loss and/or tinnitis often result from the tumor is also a possibility following surgery or radiation
the surgery. A follow-up MRI is recommended one to therapy and repeat treatment may be necessary. The progno-
five years following the surgery because of possible sis can be poorer for those with NF2 who have an increased
regrowth of the tumor. risk of bilateral acoustic neuromas and other tumors.
30 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
amoruen
citsuocA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 30
Resources Acquired hypogammaglobulinemia see
Common variable immunodeficiency
BOOKS
Filipo,R.,and Barbara Maurizio Acoustic neuroma:trends and
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome see
controversies:proceedings of the Symposium Acoustic
AIDS
Neuroma:Trends and Controversies,Rome,Italy,Novem-
ber 13–15,1997.The Hague,Netherlands:Kugler,1999.
Malis,Leonard Acoustic NeuromaNew York:Elsevier,1998.
Roland,Peter,and Bradley Marple. Diagnosis and Manage-
ment of Acoustic Neuroma (Sipac).Alexandria,VA:
American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck
Acrocyanosis
Survey Foundation,1998.
Definition
PERIODICALS
Broad,R. W. “Management of Acoustic Neuroma.”In New
Acrocyanosis is a decrease in the amount of oxygen
England Journal of Medicine.340(14) (8 April
delivered to the extremities. The hands and feet turn blue
1999):1119.
because of the lack of oxygen. Decreased blood supply
Lederman G,E. Arbit,and J. Lowry. “Management of Acoustic
to the affected areas is caused by constriction or spasm of
Neuroma.”New England Journal of Medicine.340(14) (8
small blood vessels.
April 1999):1119–1120.
Levo H.,I. Pyykko,and G. Blomstedt. “Non-surgical Treat-
ment of Vestibular Schwannoma Patients.”Acta Oto- Description
Laryngologica529 (1997):56–8.
O’Donoghue G.M.,T. Nikolopoulos and J. Thomsen. “Man- Acrocyanosis is a painless disorder caused by constric-
agement of Acoustic Neuroma.”In New England Journal tion or narrowing of small blood vessels in the skin of affect-
of Medicine340(14) (8 April 1999):1120–1121. ed patients. The spasm of the blood vessels decreases the
Rigby,P. L.,et al. “Acoustic Neuroma Surgery:Outcome amount of blood that passes through them,resulting in less
Analysis of Patient-Perceived Disability.”In American
blood being delivered to the hands and feet. The hands may
Journal of Otology18 (July 1997):427–35.
be the main area affected. The affected areas turn blue and
van Roijen,L.,et al. “Costs and Effects of Microsurgery versus
become cold and sweaty. Localized swelling may also occur.
Radiosurgery in Treating Acoustic Neuroma.”In Acta
Emotion and cold temperatures can worsen the symptoms,
Neurochirurgica139 (1997):942–48.
while warmth can decrease symptoms. The disease is seen
ORGANIZATIONS mainly in women and the effect of the disorder is mainly
Acoustic Neuroma Association. 600 Peachtree Pkwy,Suite cosmetic. People with the disease tend to be uncomfortable,
108,Cumming,GA 30041-6899. Phone:(770) 205-8211. with sweaty,cold,bluish colored hands and feet.
Fax:(770) 205-0239. ANAusa@aol.com <http://anausa.
org>. 28 June 2001.
Causes and symptoms
Acoustic Neuroma Association of Canada Box 369,Edmonton,
AB T5J 2J6. 1-800-561-ANAC(2622). (780)428-3384.
The sympathetic nerves cause constriction or spasms
anac@compusmart.ab.ca. <http://www.anac.ca>. 28 June
in the peripheral blood vessels that supply blood to the
2001.
extremities. The spasms are a contraction of the muscles
British Acoustic Neuroma Association. Oak House,Ransom
in the walls of the blood vessels. The contraction
Wood Business Park,Southwell Road West,Mansfield,
Nottingham,NG21 0HJ. Tel:01623 632143. Fax:01623 decreases the internal diameter of the blood vessels,
635313. bana@btclick.com. <http://www.ukan.co.uk/ thereby decreasing the amount of blood flow through the
bana>. 28 June 2001. affected area. The spasms occur on a persistent basis,
Seattle Acoustic Neuroma Group. Emcityland@aol.com resulting in long term reduction of blood supply to the
<http://acousticneuromaseattle.org/entryenglish.html>. 28 hands and feet. Sufficient blood still passes through the
June 2001. blood vessels so that the tissue in the affected areas does
not starve for oxygen or die. Mainly,blood vessels near
OTHER
the surface of the skin are affected.
National Institute of Health Consensus Statement Online.
Acoustic Neuroma9(4)(11-13 December 1991). <http://
text.nlm.nih.gov/nih/cdc/www/87txt.html>. (28 June 2001). Diagnosis
University of California at San Francisco (UCSF). Information
on Acoustic Neuromas(28 June 2001). <http://itsa.ucsf. Diagnosis is made by observation of the main clini-
edu/~rkj/IndexAN. html>. cal symptoms, including persistently blue and sweaty
hands and/or feet and a lack of pain. Cooling the hands
Lisa Andres,M.S.,CGC increases the blueness,while warming the hands decreas-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 31
Acrocyanosis
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 31
process and use nutrients like fats and sugars is also
KEY TERMS altered. In children whose bony growth plates have not
closed, the chemical changes of acromegaly result in
Sympathetic nerve—A nerve of the autonomic exceptional growth of long bones. This variant is called
nervous system that regulates involuntary and gigantism, with the additional bone growth causing
automatic reactions, especially to stress. unusual height. When the abnormality occurs after bone
growth stops,the disorder is called acromegaly.
Description
es the blue color. The acrocyanosis patient’s pulse is nor- Acromegaly is a relatively rare disorder,occurring in
mal,which rules out obstructive diseases. Raynaud’s dis- approximately 50 out of every one million people (50/
easediffers from acrocyanosis in that it causes white and 1,000,000). Both men and women are affected. Because
red skin coloration phases,not just bluish discoloration. the symptoms of acromegaly occur so gradually,diagno-
sis is often delayed. The majority of patients are not
Treatment identified until they are middle aged.
Acrocyanosis usually isn’t treated. Drugs that block
Causes and symptoms
the uptake of calcium (calcium channel blockers) and
alpha-one antagonists reduce the symptoms in most The pituitary is a small gland located at the base of
cases. Drugs that dilate blood vessels are only effective the brain. A gland is a collection of cells that releases
some of the time. Sweating from the affected areas can certain chemicals,or hormones,which are important to
be profuse and require treatment. Surgery to cut the sym- the functioning of other organs or body systems. The
pathetic nerves is performed rarely. pituitary hormones travel throughout the body and are
involved in a large number of activities, including the
regulation of growth and reproductive functions. The
Prognosis
cause of acromegaly can be traced to the pituitary’s pro-
Acrocyanosis is a benign and persistent disease. The duction of GH.
main concern of patients is cosmetic. Left untreated,the
Under normal conditions,the pituitary receives input
disease does not worsen.
from another brain structure,the hypothalamus,located
at the base of the brain. This input from the hypothala-
Resources mus regulates the pituitary’s release of hormones. For
example,the hypothalamus produces growth hormone-
BOOKS
Alexander,R. W.,R. C. Schlant,and V. Fuster,eds. The Heart. releasing hormone (GHRH),which directs the pituitary
9th ed. New York:McGraw-Hill,1998. to release GH. Input from the hypothalamus should also
Berkow,Robert,ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information. direct the pituitary to stop releasing hormones.
Whitehouse Station,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,
In acromegaly,the pituitary continues to release GH
1997.
and ignores signals from the hypothalamus. In the liver,
Larsen,D. E.,ed. Mayo Clinic Family Health Book.New York:
GH causes production of a hormone called insulin-like
William Morrow and Co.,Inc.,1996.
growth factor 1 (IGF-1),which is responsible for growth
throughout the body. When the pituitary refuses to stop
John T. Lohr,PhD
producing GH,the levels of IGF-1 also reach abnormal
peaks. Bones,soft tissue,and organs throughout the body
begin to enlarge, and the body changes its ability to
process and use nutrients like sugars and fats.
Acromegaly and gigantism In acromegaly,an individual’s hands and feet begin
to grow,becoming thick and doughy. The jaw line,nose,
Definition
and forehead also grow,and facial features are described
Acromegaly is a disorder in which the abnormal as “coarsening”. The tongue grows larger,and because
release of a particular chemical from the pituitary gland the jaw is larger,the teeth become more widely spaced.
in the brain causes increased growth in bone and soft tis- Due to swelling within the structures of the throat and
sue,as well as a variety of other disturbances throughout sinuses,the voice becomes deeper and sounds more hol-
the body. This chemical released from the pituitary gland low,and patients may develop loud snoring. Various hor-
is called growth hormone (GH). The body’s ability to monal changes cause symptoms such as:
32 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
msitnagig
dna
ylagemorcA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 32
•heavy sweating
•oily skin
•increased coarse body hair
•improper processing of sugars in the diet (and some-
times actual diabetes)
•high blood pressure
•increased calcium in the urine (sometimes leading to
kidney stones)
•increased risk of gallstones; and
•swelling of the thyroid gland
People with acromegaly have more skin tags,or out-
growths of tissue,than normal. This increase in skin tags
is also associated with the development of growths,
called polyps,within the large intestine that may eventu-
ally become cancerous. Patients with acromegaly often
suffer from headaches and arthritis. The various
swellings and enlargements throughout the body may
press on nerves,causing sensations of local tingling or
burning,and sometimes result in muscle weakness.
The most common cause of this disorder (in 90% of
patients) is the development of a noncancerous tumor with-
in the pituitary,called a pituitary adenoma. These tumors
are the source of the abnormal release of GH. As these
tumors grow,they may press on nearby structures within the
brain,causing headaches and changes in vision. As the ade-
noma grows,it may disrupt other pituitary tissue,interfering
with the release of other hormones. These disruptions may
be responsible for changes in the menstrual cycle of
women,decreases in the sexual drive in men and women,
and the abnormal production of breast milk in women. In
rare cases,acromegaly is caused by the abnormal produc-
tion of GHRH,which leads to the increased production of
increase of IGF-1 (3-10 times above the normal level) are
GH. Certain tumors in the pancreas,lungs,adrenal glands,
useful. These results,however,must be carefully inter-
thyroid,and intestine produce GHRH,which in turn triggers
preted because normal laboratory values for IGF-1 vary
production of an abnormal quantity of GH.
when the patient is pregnant,undergoing puberty,elder-
ly,or severely malnourished. Normal patients will show a
Diagnosis decrease in GH production when given a large dose of
sugar (glucose). Patients with acromegaly will not show
Because acromegaly produces slow changes over
this decrease,and will often show an increase in GH pro-
time,diagnosis is often significantly delayed. In fact,the
duction. Magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) is useful
characteristic coarsening of the facial features is often
for viewing the pituitary,and for identifying and locating
not recognized by family members,friends,or long-time
an adenoma. When no adenoma can be located,the search
family physicians. Often,the diagnosis is suspected by a
for a GHRH-producing tumor in another location begins.
new physician who sees the patient for the first time and
is struck by the patient’s characteristic facial appearance.
Comparing old photographs from a number of different Treatment
time periods will often increase suspicion of the disease.
The first step in treatment of acromegaly is removal of
Because the quantity of GH produced varies widely all or part of the pituitary adenoma. Removal requires
under normal conditions, demonstrating high levels of surgery,usually performed by entering the skull through
GH in the blood is not sufficient to merit a diagnosis of the nose. While this surgery can cause rapid improvement
acromegaly. Instead, laboratory tests measuring an of many acromegaly symptoms, most patients will also
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 33
Acromegaly
and
gigantism
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 33
Enlarged feet is one deformity caused by acromegaly.(Cus-
tom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Adenoma—A type of noncancerous (benign)
tumor that often involves the overgrowth of certain
cells found in glands.
Gland—A collection of cells that releases certain
chemicals, or hormones, that are important to the
functioning of other organs or body systems.
Hormone—A chemical produced in one part of
the body that travels to another part of the body in
order to exert an effect.
Hypothalamus—A structure within the brain
responsible for a large number of normal functions
throughout the body, including regulating sleep,
temperature, eating, and sexual development. The
hypothalamus also regulates the functions of the
require additional treatment with medication. Bromocrip-
pituitary gland by directing the pituitary to stop or
tine (Parlodel) is a medication that can be taken by mouth,
start production of its hormones.
while octreotide (Sandostatin) must be injected every eight
hours. Both of these medications are helpful in reducing Pituitary—A gland located at the base of the brain
GH production,but must often be taken for life and pro- that produces a number of hormones, including
duce their own unique side effects. Some patients who can- those that regulate growth and reproductive func-
not undergo surgery are treated with radiation therapyto tions. Overproduction of the pituitary hormone
the pituitary in an attempt to shrink the adenoma. Radiating called growth hormone (GH) is responsible for the
the pituitary may take up to 10 years,however,and may condition known as acromegaly.
also injure/destroy other normal parts of the pituitary.
Prognosis
ORGANIZATIONS
Without treatment, patients with acromegaly will Pituitary Tumor Network Association. 16350 Ventura Blvd.,
most likely die early because of the disease’s effects on the #231,Encino,CA 91436. (805) 499-9973.
heart,lungs,brain,or due to the development of cancerin
the large intestine. With treatment,however,a patient with Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
acromegaly may be able to live a normal lifespan.
ACT see Alanine aminotransferase test
Resources ACTH test see Adrenocorticotropic
BOOKS hormone test
Biller,Beverly M. K.,and Gilbert H. Daniels. “Growth Hor-
Actinomyces israelii infection see
mone Excess:Acromegaly and Gigantism.”In Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et Actinomycosis
al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Jameson,J. Larry. “Growth Hormone Excess:Acromegaly and
Gigantism.”In Cecil Textbook of Medicine,ed. J. Claude
Bennett and Fred Plum. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,
1996.
PERIODICALS Actinomycosis
Jaffe,C. A. “Acromegaly:Recognition and Treatment.”Drugs
47,no. 3 (1994):425+. Definition
Krishna,A. Y. “Management of Acromegaly:A Review.”Ameri-
Actinomycosis is an infection primarily caused by
can Journal of Medical Science308,no. 6 (1994):370+.
Maugans,Todd,and Michael L. Coates. “Diagnosis and Treat- the bacterium Actinomyces israelii. Infection most often
ment of Acromegaly.”American Family Physician52,no. occurs in the face and neck region and is characterized
1 (July 1995):207+. by the presence of a slowly enlarging,hard,red lump.
34 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sisocymonitcA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 34
A comparison of the right hand of a person afflicted with
acromegaly (left) and the hand of a normal sized person.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo.Reproduced by permission.)
Description
KEY TERMS
Actinomycosis is a relatively rare infection occurring
in one out of 300,000(1/300,000) people per year. It is
characterized by the presence of a lump or mass that often Biopsy—The process which removes a sample of
forms,draining sinus tracts to the skin surface. Fifty per- tissue for microscopic examination to aid in the
cent of actinomycosis cases are of the head and neck region diagnosis of a disease.
(also called “lumpy jaw”and “cervicofacial actinomyco- Sinus tract—A narrow, elongated channel in the
sis”),15% are in the chest,20% are in the abdomen,and body which allows the escape of fluid.
the rest are in the pelvis,heart,and brain. Men are three
times more likely to develop actinomycosis than women.
Causes and symptoms the lesion and/or to remove the site of infection. To kill
Actinomycosis is usually caused by the bacterium the bacteria,large doses of penicillin are given through a
Actinomyces israelii. This bacterium is normally present vein daily for two to six weeks followed by six to twelve
in the mouth but can cause disease if it enters tissues fol- months of penicillin taken by mouth. Tetracycline,clin-
lowing an injury. Actinomyces israelii is an anaerobic damycin,or erythromycin may be used instead of peni-
bacterium which means it dislikes oxygen but grows very cillin. The antibiotic therapy must be completed to insure
well in deep tissues where oxygen levels are low. Tooth that the infection does not return. Hyperbaric oxygen
extraction, tooth disease, root canal treatment, jaw (oxygen under high pressure) therapy in combination
surgery,or poor dental hygiene can allow Actinomyces with the antibiotic therapy has been successful.
israeliito cause an infection in the head and neck region.
The main symptom of cervicofacial actinomycosis is Prognosis
the presence of a hard lump on the face or neck. The lump Complete recovery is achieved following treatment.
may or may not be red. Feveroccurs in some cases. If left untreated,the infection may cause localized bone
destruction.
Diagnosis
Prevention
Cervicofacial actinomycosis can be diagnosed by a fam-
ily doctor or dentist and the patient may be referred to an oral The best prevention is to maintain good dental hy-
surgeon or infectious disease specialist. The diagnosis of giene.
actinomycosis is based upon several things. The presence of a
red lump with draining sinuses on the head or neck is strongly Resources
suggestive of cervicofacial actinomycosis. A recent history of
OTHER
tooth extraction or signs of tooth decay or poor dental “Actinomycosis.”HealthAnswers.com. 6 Feb. 1998. <http://
hygiene aid in the diagnosis. Microscopic examination of the www.healthanswers.com/database/ami/converted/
fluid draining from the sinuses shows the characteristic “sul- 000599.html>.
fur granules”(small yellow colored material in the fluid) pro-
Belinda Rowland,PhD
duced by Actinomyces israelii. A biopsy may be performed to
remove a sample of the infected tissue. This procedure can be
Activated charcoal see Charcoal, activated
performed under local anesthesia in the doctor’s office. Occa-
sionally the bacteria can be cultured from the sinus tract fluid Activated partial thromboplastin time see
or from samples of the infected tissue. Partial thromboplastin time
Actinomycosis in the lungs, abdomen, pelvis, or
brain can be very hard to diagnose since the symptoms
often mimic those of other diseases. Actinomycosis of
the lungs or abdomen can resemble tuberculosisor can-
cer. x-ray results,the presence of draining sinus tracts,
Acupressure
and microscopic analysis and culturing of infected tissue
assist in the diagnosis. Definition
Acupressure is a form of touch therapy that utilizes
Treatment
the principles of acupunctureand Chinese medicine. In
Actinomycosis is difficult to treat because of its acupressure,the same points on the body are used as in
dense tissue location. Surgery is often required to drain acupuncture, but are stimulated with finger pressure
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 35
Acupressure
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 35
instead of with the insertion of needles. Acupressure is Medicine, which may be at least 2,000 years old. Chi-
used to relieve a variety of symptoms and pain. nese medicine has developed acupuncture,acupressure,
herbal remedies, diet, exercise, lifestyle changes, and
other remedies as part of its healing methods. Nearly all
Purpose of the forms of Oriental medicine that are used in the
West today,including acupuncture,acupressure,shiatsu,
Acupressure massage performed by a therapist can be
and Chinese herbal medicine,have their roots in Chinese
very effective both as prevention and as a treatment for many
medicine. One legend has it that acupuncture and acu-
health conditions,including headaches,general aches and
pressure evolved as early Chinese healers studied the
pains,colds and flu,arthritis,allergies,asthma,nervous ten-
puncture woundsof Chinese warriors,noting that certain
sion, menstrual cramps, sinus problems, sprains, tennis
points on the body created interesting results when stim-
elbow,and toothaches,among others. Unlike acupuncture
ulated. The oldest known text specifically on acupunc-
which requires a visit to a professional,acupressure can be
ture points,the Systematic Classic of Acupuncture,dates
performed by a layperson. Acupressure techniques are fairly
easy to learn,and have been used to provide quick,cost-free,
back to 282 A.D.Acupressure is the non-invasive form of
acupuncture, as Chinese physicians determined that
and effective relief from many symptoms. Acupressure
stimulating points on the body with massage and pres-
points can also be stimulated to increase energy and feelings
sure could be effective for treating certain problems.
of well-being,reduce stress,stimulate the immune system,
and alleviate sexual dysfunction.
Outside of Asian-American communities,Chinese
medicine remained virtually unknown in the United
Description States until the 1970s,when Richard Nixon became the
first U.S. president to visit China. On Nixon’s trip,jour-
Origins
nalists were amazed to observe major operations being
One of the oldest text of Chinese medicine is the performed on patients without the use of anesthetics.
Huang Di, The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Instead, wide-awake patients were being operated on,
36 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
erusserpucA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 36
Therapist working acupressure points on a woman’s shoulder.(Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by permission.)
with only acupuncture needles inserted into them to con-
trol pain. At that time,a famous columnist for the New
York Times,James Reston,had to undergo surgery and
elected to use acupuncture for anesthesia. Later,he wrote
some convincing stories on its effectiveness. Despite
being neglected by mainstream medicine and the Ameri-
can Medical Association (AMA),acupuncture and Chi-
nese medicine became a central to alternative medicine
practitioners in the United States. Today,there are mil-
lions of patients who attest to its effectiveness,and near-
ly 9,000 practitioners in all 50 states.
Acupressure is practiced as a treatment by Chinese
medicine practitioners and acupuncturists,as well as by
massage therapists. Most massage schools in American
include acupressure techniques as part of their bodywork
programs. Shiatsu massage is very closely related to acu-
pressure,working with the same points on the body and
the same general principles,although it was developed
over centuries in Japan rather than in China. Reflexology
is a form of bodywork based on acupressure concepts.
Jin Shin Do is a bodywork technique with an increasing
number of practitioners in America that combines acu-
pressure and shiatsu principles with qigong, Reichian
theory,and meditation.
Acupressure and Chinese medicine
Chinese medicine views the body as a small part of
the universe,subject to laws and principles of harmony
and balance. Chinese medicine does not make as sharp a
destinction as Western medicine does between mind and
body. The Chinese system believes that emotions and
mental states are every bit as influential on disease as
purely physical mechanisms,and considers factors like
work,environment,and relationships as fundamental to a
patient’s health. Chinese medicine also uses very different
symbols and ideas to discuss the body and health. While
Western medicine typically describes health as mainly
physical processes composed of chemical equations and
reactions,the Chinese use ideas like yin and yang,chi,
and the organ system to describe health and the body.
Everything in the universe has properties of yin and
yang. Yin is associated with cold,female,passive,down-
ward,inward,dark,wet. Yang can be described as hot,
male, active, upward, outward, light, dry, and so on.
Nothing is either completely yin or yang. These two prin-
ciples always interact and affect each other,although the
body and its organs can become imbalanced by having
either too much or too little of either.
Chi (pronounced chee,also spelled qior kiin Japan-
ese shiatsu) is the fundamental life energy. It is found in
food,air,water,and sunlight,and it travels through the
body in channels called meridians. There are 12 major
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 37
Acupressure
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 37
(cid:0)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:10) (cid:11)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:14)
(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:5)(cid:7) (cid:17)(cid:18)
(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:24) (cid:25)(cid:26)
Acupressure points to relieve hay fever,sore throat,and
heartburn.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
mine energy imbalances. Then,the therapist will work
KEY TERMS with different meridians throughout the body,depend-
ing on which organs are imbalanced in the abdomen.
Acupoint—A pressure point stimulated in acu- The therapist will use different types of finger move-
pressure. ments and pressure on different acupoints, depending
on whether the chi needs to be increased or dispersed at
Chi—Basic life energy.
different points. The therapist observes and guides the
Meridian—A channel through which chi travels in energy flow through the patient’s body throughout the
the body. session. Sometimes,special herbs (Artemesia vulgaris
Moxibustion—An acupuncture technique that or moxa) may be placed on a point to warm it,a process
burns the herb moxa or mugwort. called moxibustion. A session of acupressure is general-
ly a very pleasant experience,and some people experi-
Shiatsu—Japanese form of acupressure massage.
ence great benefit immediately. For more chronic con-
Yin/yang—Universal characteristics used to des- ditions, several sessions may be necessary to relieve
cribe aspects of the natural world. and improve conditions.
Acupressure massage usually costs from $30–70 per
hour session. A visit to a Chinese medicine physician or
acupuncturist can be more expensive, comparable to a
meridians in the body that transport chi,corresponding to visit to an allopathic physician if the practitioner is an
the 12 main organs categorized by Chinese medicine. MD. Insurance reimbursement varies widely, and con-
Disease is viewed as an imbalance of the organs and sumers should be aware if their policies cover alternative
chi in the body. Chinese medicine has developed intri- treatment,acupuncture,or massage therapy.
cate systems of how organs are related to physical and
mental symptoms, and it has devised corresponding Self-treatment
treatments using the meridian and pressure point net-
Acupressure is easy to learn, and there are many
works that are classified and numbered. The goal of acu-
good books that illustrate the position of acupoints and
pressure,and acupuncture,is to stimulate and unblock
meridians on the body. It is also very versatile,as it can
the circulation of chi,by activating very specific points,
be done anywhere,and it’s a good form of treatment for
called pressure points or acupoints. Acupressure seeks
spouses and partners to give to each other and for parents
to stimulate the points on the chi meridians that pass
to perform on children for minor conditions.
close to the skin, as these are easiest to unblock and
While giving self-treatment or performing acupressure
manipulate with finger pressure.
on another,a mental attitude of calmness and attention is
Acupressure can be used as part of a Chinese important, as one person’s energy can be used to help
physician’s prescription,as a session of massage ther- another’s. Loose,thin clothing is recommended. There are
apy, or as a self-treatment for common aches and ill- three general techniques for stimulating a pressure point.
nesses. A Chinese medicine practitioner examines a
•Tonifying is meant to strengthen weak chi,and is done
patient very thoroughly,looking at physical,mental and
by pressing the thumb or finger into an acupoint with a
emotional activity, taking the pulse usually at the
firm,steady pressure,holding it for up to two minutes.
wrists, examining the tongue and complexion, and
•Dispersing is meant to move stagnant or blocked chi,
observing the patient’s demeanor and attitude,to get a
and the finger or thumb is moved in a circular motion or
complete diagnosis of which organs and meridian
slightly in and out of the point for two minutes.
points are out of balance. When the imbalance is locat-
ed, the physician will recommend specific pressure •Calming the chi in a pressure point utilizes the palm to
points for acupuncture or acupressure. If acupressure is cover the point and gently stroke the area for about two
recommended, the patient might opt for a series of minutes.
treatments from a massage therapist. There are many pressure points that are easily found
and memorized to treat common ailments from headaches
In massage therapy,acupressurists will evaluate a
to colds.
patient’s symptoms and overall health, but a massage
therapist’s diagnostic training isn’t as extensive as a •For headaches,toothaches,sinus problems,and pain in
Chinese physician’s. In a massage therapy treatment,a the upper body,the “LI4”point is recommended. It is
person usually lies down on a table or mat, with thin located in the web between the thumb and index finger,
clothing on. The acupressurist will gently feel and pal- on the back of the hand. Using the thumb and index fin-
pate the abdomen and other parts of the body to deter- ger of the other hand,apply a pinching pressure until
38 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
erusserpucA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 38
the point is felt,and hold it for two minutes. Pregnant The mechanisms of acupuncture and acupressure
women should never press this point. remain difficult to document in terms of the biochemical
processes involved; numerous testimonials are the prima-
•To calm the nerves and stimulate digestion, find the
ry evidence backing up the effectiveness of acupressure
“CV12”point that is four thumb widths above the navel
and acupuncture. However,a body of research is growing
in the center of the abdomen. Calm the point with the
that verifies the effectiveness in acupressure and
palm,using gentle stroking for several minutes.
acupuncture techniques in treating many problems and in
•To stimulate the immune system,find the “TH5”point
controlling pain.
on the back of the forearm two thumb widths above the
wrist. Use a dispersing technique,or circular pressure
Resources
with the thumb or finger,for two minutes on each arm.
•For headaches,sinus congestion,and tension,locate the BOOKS
Jarmey,Chris and John Tindall. Acupressure for Common Ail-
“GB20”points at the base of the skull in the back of the
ments.London:Gaia,1991.
head,just behind the bones in back of the ears. Disperse
Kakptchuk,Ted. The Web That Has No Weaver:Understanding
these points for two minutes with the fingers or thumbs.
Chinese Medicine.New York:Congdon and Weed,1983.
Also find the “yintang”point,which is in the middle of
Warren,Frank Z.,MD. Freedom From Pain Through Acupres-
the forehead between the eyebrows. Disperse it with
sure.New York:Fell,1976.
gentle pressure for two minutes to clear the mind and to
PERIODICALS
relieve headaches.
Massage Therapy Journal.820 Davis Street,Suite 100,
Evanston,IL 60201-4444.
Precautions
OTHER
Acupressure is a safe technique,but it is not meant to American Association of Oriental Medicine. <http://www.
replace professional health care. A physician should aaom.org/> (December 28,2000).
always be consulted when there are doubts about medical National Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine Alliance. <http://
conditions. If a condition is chronic,a professional should www.acuall.org/> (December 28,2000).
be consulted; purely symptomatic treatment can exacer-
bate chronic conditions. Acupressure should not be Douglas Dupler
applied to open wounds,or where there is swelling and
inflammation. Areas of scar tissue,blisters,boils,rashes, Acupressure, foot see Reflexology
or varicose veinsshould be avoided. Finally,certain acu-
pressure points should not be stimulated on people with
high or low blood pressure and on pregnant women.
Acupuncture
Research and general acceptance
In general,Chinese medicine has been slow to gain Definition
acceptance in the West,mainly because it rests on ideas
Acupuncture is one of the main forms of treatment in
very foreign to the scientific model. For instance,West-
traditional Chinese medicine. It involves the use of
ern scientists have trouble with the idea of chi,the invisi-
sharp,thin needles that are inserted in the body at very
ble energy of the body,and the idea that pressing on cer-
specific points. This process is believed to adjust and alter
tain points can alleviate certain conditions seems some-
the body’s energy flow into healthier patterns,and is used
times too simple for scientists to believe.
to treat a wide variety of illnesses and health conditions.
Western scientists,in trying to account for the action
of acupressure,have theorized that chi is actually part of
Purpose
the neuroendocrine system of the body. Celebrated ortho-
pedic surgeon Robert O. Becker,who was twice nominated The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends
for the Nobel Prize, wrote a book on the subject called acupuncture as an effective treatment for over forty med-
Cross Currents:The Promise of Electromedicine; The Per- ical problems,including allergies,respiratory conditions,
ils of Electropollution. By using precise electrical measur- gastrointestinal disorders,gynecological problems,ner-
ing devices, Becker and his colleagues showed that the vous conditions, and disorders of the eyes, nose and
body has a complex web of electromagnetic energy,and throat,and childhood illnesses,among others. Acupunc-
that traditional acupressure meridians and points contained ture has been used in the treatment of alcoholism and
amounts of energy that non-acupressure points did not. substance abuse. It is an effective and low-cost treatment
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 39
Acupuncture
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 39
for headaches and chronic pain,associated with problems ed effects of puncture woundsin Chinese warriors. The
like back injuries and arthritis. It has also been used to oldest known text on acupuncture,the Systematic Classic
supplement invasive Western treatments like chemother- of Acupuncture,dates back to 282 A.D.Although acupunc-
apyand surgery. Acupuncture is generally most effective ture is its best known technique,Chinese medicine tradi-
when used as prevention or before a health condition tionally utilizes herbal remedies,dietary therapy,lifestyle
becomes acute,but it has been used to help patients suf- changes and other means to treat patients.
fering from cancerand AIDS. Acupuncture is limited in
In the early 1900s, only a few Western physicians
treating conditions or traumas that require surgery or
who had visited China were fascinated by acupuncture,
emergency care (such as for broken bones).
but outside of Asian-American communities it remained
virtually unknown until the 1970s,when Richard Nixon
became the first U.S. president to visit China. On Nixon’s
Description
trip,journalists were amazed to observe major operations
Origins being performed on patients without the use of anesthetics.
Instead,wide-awake patients were being operated on with
The original text of Chinese medicine is the Nei
only acupuncture needles inserted into them to control
Ching,The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medi-
pain. During that time,a famous columnist for the New
cine, which is estimated to be at least 2,500 years old.
York Times, James Reston, had to undergo surgery and
Thousands of books since then have been written on the
elected to use acupuncture instead of pain medication,and
subject of Chinese healing, and its basic philosophies
he wrote some convincing stories on its effectiveness.
spread long ago to other Asian civilizations. Nearly all of
the forms of Oriental medicine which are used in the West Today acupuncture is being practiced in all 50 states
today,including acupuncture,shiatsu,acupressuremas- by over 9,000 practitioners,with over 4,000 MDs includ-
sage,and macrobiotics,are part of or have their roots in ing it in their practices. Acupuncture has shown notable
Chinese medicine. Legend has it that acupuncture devel- success in treating many conditions,and over 15 million
oped when early Chinese physicians observed unpredict- Americans have used it as a therapy. Acupuncture,how-
40 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
erutcnupucA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 40
Woman undergoing facial acupuncture.(Photograph by Yoav Levy.Phototake NYC.Reproduced by permission.)
ever,remains largely unsupported by the medical estab- tors like work,environment,lifestyle and relationships as
lishment. The American Medical Association has been fundamental to the overall picture of a patient’s health.
resistant to researching it,as it is based on concepts very Chinese medicine also uses very different symbols and
different from the Western scientific model. ideas to discuss the body and health. While Western med-
icine typically describes health in terms of measurable
Several forms of acupuncture are being used today in
physical processes made up of chemical reactions, the
America. Japanese acupuncture uses extremely thin nee-
Chinese use ideas like yin and yang,chi,the organ sys-
dles and does not incorporate herbal medicine in its prac-
tem, and the five elements to describe health and the
tice. Auricular acupuncture uses acupuncture points only
body. To understand the ideas behind acupuncture,it is
on the ear, which are believed to stimulate and balance
worthwhile to introduce some of these basic terms.
internal organs. In France,where acupuncture is very pop-
ular and more accepted by the medical establishment,neu-
YIN AND YANG. According to Chinese philosophy,
rologist Paul Nogier developed a system of acupuncture
the universe and the body can be described by two sepa-
based on neuroendocrine theory rather than on traditional
rate but complementary principles,that of yin and yang.
Chinese concepts,which is gaining some use in America.
For example,in temperature,yin is cold and yang is hot.
In gender,yin is female and yang is male. In activity,yin
is passive and yang is active. In light, yin is dark and
Basic ideas of Chinese medicine
yang is bright; in direction yin is inward and downward
Chinese medicine views the body as a small part of and yang is outward and up,and so on. Nothing is ever
the universe,and subject to universal laws and principles completely yin or yang, but a combination of the two.
of harmony and balance. Chinese medicine does not These two principles are always interacting,opposing,
draw a sharp line, as Western medicine does, between and influencing each other. The goal of Chinese medi-
mind and body. The Chinese system believes that emo- cine is not to eliminate either yin or yang,but to allow
tions and mental states are every bit as influential on dis- the two to balance each other and exist harmoniously
ease as purely physical mechanisms,and considers fac- together. For instance,if a person suffers from symptoms
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 41
Acupuncture
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 41
Governor vessel
Bladder meridian
Triple burner meridian
Conception vessel
Stomach meridian
Large intestine meridian
Small intestine meridian
Gallbladder meridian
Acupuncture sites and meridians on the face and neck.(Illustration by Hans & Cassady.)
organ to another. Each organ has a different profile of
KEY TERMS symptoms it can manifest.
THE FIVE ELEMENTS. Another basis of Chinese theo-
Acupressure—Form of massage using acupunc-
ry is that the world and body are made up of five main
ture points.
elements:wood,fire,earth,metal,and water. These ele-
Auricular acupuncture—Acupuncture using only ments are all interconnected, and each element either
points found on the ears. generates or controls another element. For instance,
water controls fire and earth generates metal. Each organ
Chi—Basic life energy.
is associated with one of the five elements. The Chinese
Meridian—Channel through which chi travels in
system uses elements and organs to describe and treat
the body.
conditions. For instance, the kidney is associated with
Moxibustion—Acupuncture technique which water and the heart is associated with fire,and the two
burns the herb moxa or mugwort. organs are related as water and fire are related. If the kid-
ney is weak, then there might be a corresponding fire
Tonification—Acupuncture technique for strength-
problem in the heart, so treatment might be made by
ening the body.
acupuncture or herbs to cool the heart system and/or
Yin/Yang—Universal characteristics used to des-
increase energy in the kidney system.
cribe aspects of the natural world.
The Chinese have developed an intricate system of
how organs and elements are related to physical and
mental symptoms,and the above example is a very sim-
of high blood pressure, the Chinese system would say ple one. Although this system sounds suspect to Western
that the heart organ might have too much yang, and scientists,some interesting parallels have been observed.
would recommend methods either to reduce the yang or For instance,Western medicine has observed that with
to increase the yin of the heart,depending on the other severe heart problems,kidney failure often follows,but it
symptoms and organs in the body. Thus, acupuncture still does not know exactly why. In Chinese medicine,
therapies seek to either increase or reduce yang, or this connection between the two organs has long been
increase or reduce yin in particular regions of the body. established.
MEDICAL PROBLEMS AND ACUPUNCTURE. In Chi-
CHI. Another fundamental concept of Chinese med- nese medicine,disease as seen as imbalances in the organ
icine is that of chi (pronounced chee,also spelled qi). Chi
system or chi meridians,and the goal of any remedy or
is the fundamental life energy of the universe. It is invisi-
treatment is to assist the body in reestablishing its innate
ble and is found in the environment in the air,water,food
harmony. Disease can be caused by internal factors like
and sunlight. In the body, it is the invisible vital force
emotions, external factors like the environment and
that creates and animates life. We are all born with inher-
weather,and other factors like injuries,trauma,diet,and
ited amounts of chi,and we also get acquired chi from
germs. However, infection is seen not as primarily a
the food we eat and the air we breathe. The level and
problem with germs and viruses,but as a weakness in the
quality of a person’s chi also depends on the state of
energy of the body which is allowing a sickness to occur.
physical, mental and emotional balance. Chi travels
In Chinese medicine,no two illnesses are ever the same,
through the body along channels called meridians.
as each body has its own characteristics of symptoms and
balance. Acupuncture is used to open or adjust the flow
THE ORGAN SYSTEM. In the Chinese system,there of chi throughout the organ system,which will strength-
are twelve main organs:the lung,large intestine,stom-
en the body and prompt it to heal itself.
ach,spleen,heart,small intestine,urinary bladder,kid-
ney, liver, gallbladder, pericardium, and the “triple A VISIT TO THE ACUPUNCTURIST. The first thing an
warmer,”which represents the entire torso region. Each acupuncturist will do is get a thorough idea of a patient’s
organ has chi energy associated with it,and each organ medical history and symptoms,both physical and emo-
interacts with particular emotions on the mental level. As tional. This is done with a long questionnaire and inter-
there are twelve organs, there are twelve types of chi view. Then the acupuncturist will examine the patient to
which can move through the body, and these move find further symptoms,looking closely at the tongue,the
through twelve main channels or meridians. Chinese pulse at various points in the body,the complexion,gen-
doctors connect symptoms to organs. That is,symptoms eral behavior,and other signs like coughs or pains. From
are caused by yin/yang imbalances in one or more this,the practitioner will be able to determine patterns of
organs, or by an unhealthy flow of chi to or from one symptoms which indicate which organs and areas are
42 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
erutcnupucA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 42
imbalanced. Depending on the problem,the acupunctur- Research and general acceptance
ist will insert needles to manipulate chi on one or more
Mainstream medicine has been slow to accept acupunc-
of the twelve organ meridians. On these twelve meridi-
ture; although more MDs are using it,the American Medical
ans,there are nearly 2,000 points which can be used in
Association does not recognize it as a specialty. The reason
acupuncture, with around 200 points being most fre-
for this is that the mechanism of acupuncture is difficult to
quently used by traditional acupuncturists. During an
scientifically understand or measure,such as the invisible
individual treatment,one to twenty needles may be used,
energy of chi in the body. Western medicine,admitting that
depending on which meridian points are chosen.
acupuncture works in many cases, has theorized that the
Acupuncture needles are always sterilized and energy meridians are actually part of the nervous system and
acupuncture is a very safe procedure. The depth of inser- that acupuncture relieves pain by releasing endorphins,or
tion of needles varies,depending on which chi channels are natural pain killers,into the bloodstream. Despite the ambi-
being treated. Some points barely go beyond superficial guity in the biochemistry involved,acupuncture continues to
layers of skin, while some acupuncture points require a show effectiveness in clinical tests,from reducing pain to
depth of 1-3 in (2.5-7.5 cm) of needle. The needles general- alleviating the symptoms of chronic illnesses,and research
ly do not cause pain. Patients sometimes report pinching in acupuncture is currently growing. The Office of Alterna-
sensations and often pleasant sensations,as the body expe- tive Medicine of the National Institute of Health is currently
riences healing. Depending on the problem,the acupunc- funding research in the use of acupuncture for treating
turist might spin or move the needles,or even pass a slight depression and attention-deficit disorder.
electrical current through some of them. Moxibustionmay
be sometimes used,in which an herbal mixture (moxa or
Resources
mugwort) is either burned like incense on the acupuncture
BOOKS
point or on the end of the needle,which is believed to stim-
Fleischman,Dr. Gary F. Acupuncture:Everything You Ever
ulate chi in a particular way. Also,acupuncturists some-
Wanted To Know.New York:Barrytown,1998.
times use cupping, during which small suction cups are
Kakptchuk,Ted. The Web That Has No Weaver:Understanding
placed on meridian points to stimulate them. Chinese Medicine.New York:Congdon and Weed,1983.
How long the needles are inserted also varies. Some Requena,Yves,MD. Terrains and Pathology in Acupuncture.
Massachusetts:Paradigm,1986.
patients only require a quick in and out insertion to clear
problems and provide tonification (strengthening of PERIODICALS
health),while some other conditions might require nee- American Journal of Acupuncture.1840 41st Ave.,Suite 102,
dles inserted up to an hour or more. The average visit to P.O. Box 610,Capitola,CA 95010.
an acupuncturist takes about thirty minutes. The number OTHER
of visits to the acupuncturist varies as well,with some American Association of Oriental Medicine. <http://www.
conditions improved in one or two sessions and others aaom.org/> (December 28,2000).
requiring a series of six or more visits over the course of North American Society of Acupuncture and Alternative Medi-
weeks or months. cine. <http://www.nasa-altmed.com/> (December 28,2000).
Costs for acupuncture can vary,depending on whether
Douglas Dupler
the practitioner is an MD. Initial visits with non-MD
acupuncturists can run from $50-$100,with follow-up vis-
Acute glomerulonephritis see Acute
its usually costing less. Insurance reimbursement also
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
varies widely,depending on the company and state. Regu-
lations have been changing often. Some states authorize Acute homeopathic remedies see
Medicaid to cover acupuncture for certain conditions,and Homeopathic remedies, acute
some states have mandated that general coverage pay for
prescribing
acupuncture. Consumers should be aware of the provisions
for acupuncture in their individual policies.
Precautions
Acute kidney failure
Acupuncture is generally a very safe procedure. If a
patient is in doubt about a medical condition,more than
Definition
one physician should be consulted. Also,a patient should
always feel comfortable and confident that their Acute kidney failure occurs when illness,infection,
acupuncturist is knowledgable and properly trained. or injury damages the kidneys. Temporarily,the kidneys
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 43
Acute
kidney
failure
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 43
cannot adequately remove fluids and wastes from the Intrarenal conditions involve kidney disease or
body or maintain the proper level of certain kidney-regu- direct injury to the kidneys. These conditions include:
lated chemicals in the bloodstream.
•lack of blood supply to the kidneys (ischemia)
•use of radiocontrast agents in patients with kidney
Description problems
The kidneys are the body’s natural filtration system. •drug abuse or overdose
They perform the critical task of processing approximate- •long-term use of nephrotoxic medications,like certain
ly 200 quarts of fluid in the bloodstream every 24 hours. painmedicines
Waste products like urea and toxins, along with excess
•acute inflammation of the glomeruli,or filters,of the
fluids,are removed from the bloodstream in the form of
kidney (glomerulonephritis)
urine. Kidney (or renal) failure occurs when kidney func-
•kidney infections (pyelitis or pyelonephritis)
tioning becomes impaired. Fluids and toxins begin to
accumulate in the bloodstream. As fluids build up in the Common symptoms of acute kidney failure include:
bloodstream, the patient with acute kidney failure may
•anemia. The kidneys are responsible for producing ery-
become puffy and swollen (edematous) in the face,hands,
thropoietin (EPO),a hormone that stimulates red blood
and feet. Their blood pressure typically begins to rise,and
cell production. If kidney disease causes shrinking of
they may experience fatigueand nausea.
the kidney,red blood cell production is reduced,lead-
Unlike chronic kidney failure,which is long term ing to anemia.
and irreversible,acute kidney failure is a temporary con-
•bad breath or bad taste in mouth. Urea in the saliva may
dition. With proper and timely treatment,it can typically
cause an ammonia-like taste in the mouth.
be reversed. Often there is no permanent damage to the
•bone and joint problems. The kidneys produce vitamin
kidneys. Acute kidney failure appears most frequently as
D, which helps the body absorb calcium and keeps
a complication of serious illness,like heart failure,liver
bones strong. For patients with kidney failure, bones
failure,dehydration,severe burns,and excessive bleed-
may become brittle. In children,normal growth may be
ing (hemorrhage). It may also be caused by an obstruc-
stunted. Joint pain may also occur as a result of high
tion to the urinary tract or as a direct result of kidney dis-
phosphate levels in the blood. Retention of uric acid
ease,injury,or an adverse reaction to a medicine.
may cause gout.
Causes and symptoms •edema. Puffiness or swelling in the arms,hands,feet,
and around the eyes.
Acute kidney failure can be caused by many differ-
•frequent urination.
ent illnesses,injuries,and infections. These conditions
fall into three main categories:prerenal,postrenal,and •foamy or bloody urine. Protein in the urine may cause it
intrarenalconditions. to foam significantly. Blood in the urine may indicate
bleeding from diseased or obstructed kidneys,bladder,
Prerenal conditions do not damage the kidney,but
or ureters.
can cause diminished kidney function. They are the most
common cause of acute renal failure,and include: •headaches. High blood pressure may trigger headaches.
•dehydration •hypertension,or high blood pressure. The retention of
fluids and wastes causes blood volume to increase. This
•hemorrhage
makes blood pressure rise.
•septicemia,or sepsis
•increased fatigue. Toxic substances in the blood and the
•heart failure
presence of anemia may cause the patient to feel
•liver failure exhausted.
•burns •itching. Phosphorus, normally eliminated in the urine,
accumulates in the blood of patients with kidney failure.
Postrenal conditions cause kidney failure by obstruct-
An increased phosphorus level may cause the skin to itch.
ing the urinary tract. These conditions include:
•lower back pain. Patients suffering from certain kidney
•inflammation of the prostate gland in men (prostatitis)
problems (like kidney stones and other obstructions)
•enlargement of the prostate gland (benign prostatic
may have pain where the kidneys are located, in the
hypertrophy)
small of the back below the ribs.
•bladder or pelvic tumors
•nausea. Urea in the gastric juices may cause upset
•kidney stones(calculi) stomach.
44 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
eruliaf
yendik
etucA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 44
Diagnosis
KEY TERMS
Kidney failure is diagnosed by a doctor. A nephrolo-
gist,a doctor that specializes in the kidney,may be con-
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)—A waste product that
sulted to confirm the diagnosis and recommend treat-
is formed in the liver and collects in the blood-
ment options. The patient that is suspected of having
stream; patients with kidney failure have high
acute kidney failure will have blood and urine tests to
BUN levels.
determine the level of kidney function. A blood test will
assess the levels of creatinine, blood urea nitrogen Creatinine—A protein produced by muscle that
(BUN), uric acid, phosphate, sodium, and potassium. healthy kidneys filter out.
The kidney regulates these agents in the blood. Urine
Extracorporeal—Outside of, or unrelated to, the
samples will also be collected, usually over a 24-hour
body.
period,to assess protein loss and/or creatinine clearance.
Ischemia—A lack of blood supply to an organ or
Determining the cause of kidney failure is critical to tissue.
proper treatment. A full assessment of the kidneys is neces-
Nephrotoxic—Toxic, or damaging, to the kidney.
sary to determine if the underlying disease is treatable and if
the kidney failure is chronic or acute. X rays,magnetic res- Radiocontrast agents—Dyes administered to a
onance imaging(MRI),computed tomography scan (CT), patient for the purposes of a radiologic study.
ultrasound,renal biopsy,and/or arteriogram of the kidneys Sepsis—A bacterial infection of the bloodstream.
may be used to determine the cause of kidney failure and
Vasopressors—Medications that constrict the blood
level of remaining kidney function. X rays and ultrasound
vessels.
of the bladder and/or ureters may also be needed.
Treatment
A dialysis “run”typically lasts three to four hours,
Treatment for acute kidney failure varies. Treatment
depending on the type of dialyzer used and the physical
is directed to the underlying,primary medical condition
condition of the patient. Dialysis is used several times a
that has triggered kidney failure. Prerenal conditions may
week until acute kidney failure is reversed.
be treated with replacement fluids given through a vein,
Blood pressure changes associated with hemodialy-
diuretics,blood transfusion,or medications. Postrenal
sis may pose a risk for patients with heart problems. Peri-
conditions and intrarenal conditions may require surgery
toneal dialysis may be the preferred treatment option in
and/or medication.
these cases.
Frequently,patients in acute kidney failure require
hemodialysis,hemofiltration,or peritoneal dialysisto fil-
ter fluids and wastes from the bloodstream until the pri- Hemofiltration
mary medical condition can be controlled.
Hemofiltration,also called continuous renal replace-
ment therapy (CRRT),is a slow,continuous blood filtra-
tion therapy used to control acute kidney failure in criti-
Hemodialysis
cally ill patients. These patients are typically very sick
Hemodialysis involves circulating the patient’s and may have heart problems or circulatory problems.
blood outside of the body through an extracorporeal cir- They cannot handle the rapid filtration rates of hemodial-
cuit (ECC),or dialysis circuit. The ECC is made up of ysis. They also frequently need antibiotics,nutrition,
plastic blood tubing,a filter known as a dialyzer (or arti- vasopressors, and other fluids given through a vein to
ficial kidney),and a dialysis machine that monitors and treat their primary condition. Because hemofiltration is
maintains blood flow and administers dialysate. continuous,prescription fluids can be given to patients in
Dialysate is a sterile chemical solution that is used to kidney failure without the risk of fluid overload.
draw waste products out of the blood. The patient’s blood
Like hemodialysis,hemofiltration uses an ECC. A
leaves the body through the vein and travels through the
hollow fiber hemofilter is used instead of a dialyzer to
ECC and the dialyzer,where fluid removal takes place.
remove fluids and toxins. Instead of a dialysis machine,a
During dialysis,waste products in the bloodstream blood pump makes the blood flow through the ECC. The
are carried out of the body. At the same time,electrolytes volume of blood circulating through the ECC in hemofil-
and other chemicals are added to the blood. The purified, tration is less than that in hemodialysis. Filtration rates
chemically-balanced blood is then returned to the body. are slower and gentler on the circulatory system.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 45
Acute
kidney
failure
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 45
Hemofiltration treatment will generally be used until kid- hospitalized for other illnesses or injuries should be care-
ney failure is reversed. fully monitored for kidney failure complications. Treat-
ments and procedures that may put them at risk for kid-
ney failure (like diagnostic tests requiring radiocontrast
Peritoneal dialysis
agents or dyes) should be used with extreme caution.
Peritoneal dialysis may be used if an acute kidney
failure patient is stable and not in immediate crisis. In
Resources
peritoneal dialysis (PD), the lining of the patient’s
BOOKS
abdomen,the peritoneum,acts as a blood filter. A flexible
Bock,G. H.,E. J. Ruley,and M. P. Moore. A Parent’s Guide to
tube-like instrument (catheter) is surgically inserted into
Kidney Disorders.Minneapolis:University of Minnesota
the patient’s abdomen. During treatment,the catheter is
Press,1993.
used to fill the abdominal cavity with dialysate. Waste
Brenner,Barry M.,and Floyd C. Rector Jr.,eds. The Kidney.
products and excess fluids move from the patient’s blood-
Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co.,1991.
stream into the dialysate solution. After a certain time Cameron,J. Stewart. Kidney Failure:The Facts.New York:
period, the waste-filled dialysate is drained from the Oxford University Press,1996.
abdomen, and replaced with clean dialysate. There are Ross,Linda M.,ed. Kidney and Urinary Tract Diseases and
three type of peritoneal dialysis,which vary according to Disorders Sourcebook.Vol. 21. Detroit:Omnigraphics,
treatment time and administration method. Inc.,1997.
Peritoneal dialysis is often the best treatment option PERIODICALS
for infants and children. Their small size can make vein Stark,June. “Dialysis Choices:Turning the Tide in Acute
access difficult to maintain. It is not recommended for Renal Failure.”Nursing27,no. 2 (Feb. 1997):41-8.
patients with abdominal adhesions or other abdominal
ORGANIZATIONS
defects (like a hernia) that might reduce the efficiency of National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Dis-
the treatment. It is also not recommended for patients eases (NIDDK). Building 31,Room 9A04,31 Center
who suffer frequent bouts of an inflammation of the Drive,MSC 2560,Bethesda,MD 208792-2560. (301)
small pouches in the intestinal tract (diverticulitis). 496-3583. <http://www.niddk.nih.gov>.
National Kidney Foundation. 30 East 33rd St.,New York,NY
10016. (800) 622-9010. <http://www.kidney.org>.
Prognosis
Because many of the illnesses and underlying con- Paula Anne Ford-Martin
ditions that often trigger acute kidney failure are critical,
the prognosis for these patients many times is not good. Acute leukemias see Leukemias, acute
Studies have estimated overall deathrates for acute kid-
ney failure at 42-88%. Many people, however, die
because of the primary disease that has caused the kid-
ney failure. These figures may also be misleading
because patients who experience kidney failure as a
Acute lymphangitis
result of less serious illnesses (like kidney stones or
dehydration) have an excellent chance of complete Definition
recovery. Early recognition and prompt, appropriate
treatment are key to patient recovery. Acute lymphangitis is a bacterial infection in the
lymphatic vessels which is characterized by painful,red
Up to 10% of patients who experience acute kidney
streaks below the skin surface. This is a potentially seri-
failure will suffer irreversible kidney damage. They will
ous infection which can rapidly spread to the blood-
eventually go on to develop chronic kidney failure or
stream and be fatal.
end-stage renal disease. These patients will require long-
term dialysis or kidney transplantationto replace their
Description
lost renal functioning.
Acute lymphangitis affects a critical member of the
immune system—the lymphatic system. Waste materials
Prevention
from nearly every organ in the body drain into the lym-
Since acute kidney failure can be caused by many phatic vessels and are filtered in small organs called
things, prevention is difficult. Medications that may lymph nodes. Foreign bodies,such as bacteria or viruses,
impair kidney function should be given cautiously. are processed in the lymph nodes to generate an immune
Patients with pre-existing kidney conditions who are response to fight an infection.
46 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitignahpmyl
etucA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 46
In acute lymphangitis, bacteria enter the body
through a cut, scratch, insect bite, surgical wound, or KEY TERMS
other skin injury. Once the bacteria enter the lymphatic
system,they multiply rapidly and follow the lymphatic Biopsy—The process which removes a sample of
vessel like a highway. The infected lymphatic vessel diseased or infected tissue for microscopic exami-
becomes inflamed, causing red streaks that are visible nation to aid in diagnosis.
below the skin surface. The growth of the bacteria occurs
Lymphatic system—A component of the immune
so rapidly that the immune system does not respond fast
system consisting of vessels and nodes. Waste
enough to stop the infection.
materials from organs drain into the lymphatic
If left untreated, the bacteria can cause tissue vessels and are filtered by the lymph nodes.
destruction in the area of the infection. A pus-filled,
Septicemia—Disease caused by the presence and
painful lump called an abscess may be formed in the
growth of bacteria in the bloodstream.
infected area. Cellulitis,a generalized infection of the
lower skin layers,may also occur. In addition,the bacte-
ria may invade the bloodstream and cause septicemia.
Lay people,for that reason,often call the red streaks seen type of bacteria is causing the infection. Diagnosis is
in the skin “blood poisoning.”Septicemia is a very seri- immediate because it is based primarily on the symp-
ous illness and may be fatal. toms. Most insurance policies should cover the expenses
for the diagnosis and treatment of acute lymphangitis.
Causes and symptoms
Treatment
Acute lymphangitis is most often caused by the bac-
Because of the serious nature of this infection,treat-
terium Streptococcus pyogenes. This potentially danger-
ment would begin immediately even before the bacterial
ous bacterium also causes strep throat,infections of the
culture results were available. The only treatment for
heart,spinal cord,and lungs,and in the 1990s has been
acute lymphangitis is to give very large doses of an
called the “flesh-eating bacterium.”Staphylococci bacte-
antibiotic,usually penicillin,through the vein. Growing
ria may also cause lymphangitis.
streptococcal bacteria are usually eliminated rapidly and
Although anyone can develop lymphangitis, some
easily by penicillin. The antibiotic clindamycin may be
people are more at risk. People who have had radical mas-
included in the treatment to kill any streptococci which
tectomy(removal of a breast and nearby lymph nodes),a
are not growing and are in a resting state. Alternatively,a
leg vein removed for coronary bypass surgery,or recurrent
“broad spectrum”antibiotic may be used which would
lymphangitis caused by tinea pedis (a fungal infection on
kill many different kinds of bacteria.
the foot) are at an increased risk for lymphangitis.
Aspirinor other medications which reduce the pain
The characteristic symptoms of acute lymphangitis and the fever may also be given. Medications which
are the wide, red streaks which travel from the site of reduce any inflammation of the infected region may also
infection to the armpit or groin. The affected areas are red, be provided. The patient is likely to be hospitalized to
swollen,and painful. Blistering of the affected skin may administer the antibiotic and other medications and to
occur. The bacterial infection causes a feverof 100-104°F closely monitor his or her condition. Surgical drainage of
(38°–40°C). In addition, a general ill feeling, muscle an abscess may be necessary.
aches,headache,chills,and loss of appetite may be felt.
Prognosis
Diagnosis Complete recovery is expected if antibiotic treatment
is begun at an early stage of the infection. However, if
If lymphangitis is suspected,the person should call
untreated,acute lymphangitis can be a very serious and
his or her doctor immediately or go to an emergency
even deadly disease. Acute lymphangitis that goes untreat-
room. Acute lymphangitis could be diagnosed by the
ed can spread, causing tissue damage. Extensive tissue
family doctor,infectious disease specialist,or an emer-
damage would need to be repaired by plastic surgery.
gency room doctor. The painful,red streaks just below
Spread of the infection into the bloodstream could be fatal.
the skin surface and the high fever are diagnostic of acute
lymphangitis. A sample of blood would be taken for cul-
ture to determine whether the bacteria have entered the Prevention
bloodstream. A biopsy (removal of a piece of infected Although acute lymphangitis can occur in anyone,good
tissue) sample may be taken for culture to identify which hygiene and general health may help to prevent infections.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 47
Acute
lymphangitis
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 47
Resources
KEY TERMS
PERIODICALS
Dajer,Tony. “A Lethal Scratch.”Discover(Feb. 1998):34-7.
Streptococcus—A gram-positive, round or oval
Belinda Rowland,PhD bacteria in the genus Streptococcus. Group A
streptococci cause a number of human diseases
Acute pericarditis see Pericarditis including strep throat, impetigo, and ASPGN.
Diagnosis
Acute poststreptococcal Diagnosis of APSGN is made by taking the patient’s
history,assessing his/her symptoms,and performing cer-
glomerulonephritis
tain laboratory tests. Urinalysisusually shows blood and
Definition protein in the urine. Concentrations of urea and creati-
nine (two waste products normally filtered out of the
Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
blood by the kidneys) in the blood are often high,indi-
(APSGN) is an inflammation of the kidney tubules
cating impaired kidney function. A reliable,inexpensive
(glomeruli) that filter waste products from the blood,fol-
blood test called the anti-streptolysin-O test can confirm
lowing a streptococcal infection such as strep throat.
that a patient has or has had a streptococcal infection. A
APSGN is also called postinfectious glomerulonephritis.
throat culturemay also show the presence of group A
beta-hemolytic streptococci.
Description
Treatment
APSGN develops after certain streptococcal bacteria
(group A beta-hemolytic streptococci) have infected the Treatment of ASPGN is designed to relieve the
skin or throat. Antigens from the dead streptococci symptoms and prevent complications. Some patients are
clump together with the antibodies that killed them. advised to stay in bed until they feel better and to restrict
These clumps are trapped in the kidney tubules,cause the fluid and salt intake. Antibioticsmay be prescribed to
tubules to become inflamed,and impair that organs’abil- kill any lingering streptococcal bacteria,if their presence
ity to filter and eliminate body wastes. The onset of is confirmed. Antihypertensives may be given to help
APSGN usually occurs one to six weeks (average two control high blood pressure and diureticsmay be used to
weeks) after the streptococcal infection. reduce fluid retention and swelling. Kidney dialysisis
rarely needed.
APSGN is a relatively uncommon disease affecting
about one of every 10,000 people,although four or five
Prognosis
times that many may actually be affected by it but show
no symptoms. APSGN is most prevalent among boys Most children (up to 95%) fully recover from
between the ages of 3 and 7,but it can occur at any age. APSGN in a matter of weeks or months. Most adults (up
to 70%) also recover fully. In those who do not recover
fully,chronic or progressive problems of kidney function
Causes and symptoms
may occur. Kidney failure may result in some patients.
Frequent sore throats and a history of streptococcal
infection increase the risk of acquiring APSGN. Symp-
Prevention
toms of APSGN include:
Receiving prompt treatment for streptococcal infec-
•fluid accumulation and tissue swelling (edema) initial-
tionsmay prevent APSGN.
ly in the face and around the eyes,later in the legs
•low urine output (oliguria)
Resources
•blood in the urine (hematuria)
BOOKS
•protein in the urine (proteinuria) Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
•high blood pressure
Professional Guide to Diseases.5th ed. Springhouse,PA:
•joint painor stiffness Springhouse Corporation,1995.
48 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sitirhpenoluremolg
laccocotpertstsop
etucA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 48
ORGANIZATIONS
American Kidney Fund. 6110 Executive Boulevard,Rockville, KEY TERMS
MD 20852. (800) 638-8299. <http://216.248.130.102/
Default.htm>.
Depersonalization—A dissociative symptom in
National Kidney Foundation. 30 East 33rd St.,New York,NY
which the patient feels that his or her body is unre-
10016. (800) 622-9010. <http://www.kidney.org>.
al, is changing, or is dissolving.
Maureen Haggerty Derealization—A dissociative symptom in which
the external environment is perceived as unreal.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome see
Dissociation—A reaction to trauma in which the
Adult respiratory distress syndrome mind splits off certain aspects of the trauma from
conscious awareness. Dissociation can affect the
patient’s memory, sense of reality, and sense of
identity.
Trauma—In the context of ASD, a disastrous or
Acute stress disorder life-threatening event.
Definition
Acute stressdisorder (ASD) is an anxietydisorder
characterized by a cluster of dissociative and anxiety essential feature is a traumatic event within one month of
symptoms occurring within one month of a traumatic the onset of symptoms. Other diagnostic criteria include:
event. (Dissociation is a psychological reaction to trauma •The symptoms significantly interfere with normal
in which the mind tries to cope by “sealing off” some social or vocational functioning
features of the trauma from conscious awareness).
•The symptoms last between two days and four weeks.
Description
Treatment
Acute stress disorder is a new diagnostic category
Treatment for acute stress disorder usually includes
that was introduced in 1994 to differentiate time-limited
a combination of antidepressant medications and short-
reactions to trauma from post-traumatic stress disorder
term psychotherapy.
(PTSD).
Alternative treatment
Causes and symptoms
Acupuncturehas been recommended as a treatment
Acute stress disorder is caused by exposure to trau-
for acute stress disorder. Some other alternative
ma,which is defined as a stressor that causes intense fear
approaches,including meditation,breathing exercises,
and,usually,involves threats to life or serious injury to
and yoga, may be helpful when combined with short-
oneself or others. Examples are rape,mugging,combat,
term psychotherapy. Homeopathic treatment and the use
natural disasters,etc.
of herbal medicine and flower essences also can help the
The symptoms of stress disorder include a combining
person with acute stress disorder rebalance on the physi-
of one or more dissociative and anxiety symptoms with
cal,mental,and emotional levels.
the avoidance of reminders of the traumatic event. Disso-
ciative symptoms include emotional detachment,tempo-
rary loss of memory,depersonalization,and derealization. Prognosis
Anxiety symptoms connected with acute stress disor- The prognosis for recovery is influenced by the sever-
der include irritability,physical restlessness,sleep prob- ity and duration of the trauma,the patient’s closeness to it,
lems,inability to concentrate,and being easily startled. and the patient’s previous level of functioning. Favorable
signs include a short time period between the trauma and
onset of symptoms,immediate treatment,and appropriate
Diagnosis
social support. If the patient’s symptoms are severe
Diagnosis of acute stress disorder is based on a com- enough to interfere with normal life and have lasted longer
bination of the patient’s history and a physical examina- than one month,the diagnosis may be changed to PTSD.
tion to rule out diseases that can cause anxiety. The If the symptoms have lasted longer than one month but are
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 49
Acute
stress
disorder
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 49
not severe enough to meet the definition of PTSD, the include mood-altering behaviors or activities. Some
diagnosis may be changed to adjustment disorder. researchers speak of two types of addictions:substance
addictions (for example, alcoholism, drug abuse, and
Patients who do not receive treatment for acute
smoking); and process addictions (for example, gam-
stress disorder are at increased risk for substance abuse
bling,spending,shopping,eating,and sexual activity).
or major depressive disorders.
There is a growing recognition that many addicts,such as
polydrug abusers, are addicted to more than one sub-
Prevention stance or process.
Traumatic events cannot usually be foreseen and,
thus,cannot be prevented. However,in theory,profession- Description
al intervention soon after a major trauma might reduce the
Addiction is one of the most costly public health
likelihood or severity of ASD. In addition,some symp-
problems in the United States. It is a progressive syn-
toms of acute stress disorder result from biochemical
drome, which means that it increases in severity over
changes in the central nervous system, muscles, and
time unless it is treated. Substance abuse is characterized
digestive tract that are not subject to conscious control.
by frequent relapse, or return to the abused substance.
Substance abusers often make repeated attempts to quit
Resources
before they are successful.
BOOKS
In 1995 the economic cost of substance abuse in the
“Acute Stress Disorder.”In Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
United States exceeded $414 billion, with health care
of Mental Disorders.4th ed. Washington,DC:American
costs attributed to substance abuse estimated at more
Psychiatric Association,1994.
than $114 billion.
Corbman,Gene R. “Anxiety Disorders.”In Current Diagnosis.
Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B. Conn,et al. Philadelphia:W. B. Saun- By eighth grade,52% of adolescents have consumed
ders Co.,1997. alcohol, 41% have smoked tobacco, and 20% have
Eisendrath,Stuart J. “Psychiatric Disorders.”In Current Med-
smoked marijuana. Compared to females, males are
ical Diagnosis and Treatment,1998.37th ed. Ed. Stephen
almost four times as likely to be heavy drinkers,nearly
McPhee,et al. Stamford:Appleton & Lange,1997.
one and a half more likely to smoke a pack or more of
Kabat-Zinn,Jon. Full Catastrophe Living:Using the Wisdom
cigarettes daily,and twice as likely to smoke marijuana
of Your Body and Mind to Face Stress,Pain,and Illness.
weekly. However,among adolescents these gender dif-
New York:Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group,
Inc.,1990. ferences are decreasing. Although frequent use of tobac-
“On-Call Problems:Insomnia.”In Surgery On Call,ed. co,cocaineand heavy drinking appears to have remained
Leonard G. Gomella and Alan T. Lefor. Stamford:Apple- stable in the 1990s,marijuana use increased.
ton & Lange,1996.
In 1999,an estimated four million Americans over the
age of 12 used prescription painrelievers,sedatives,and
Rebecca J. Frey
stimulants for “nonmedical”reasons during one month.
Acute stress gastritis see Gastritis In the United States,25% of the population regularly
uses tobacco. Tobacco use reportedly kills 2.5 times as
Acute transverse myelitis see Transverse
many people each year as alcohol and drug abuse com-
myelitis
bined. According to 1998 data from the World Health
Acyclovir see Antiviral drugs Organization,there were 1.1 billion smokers worldwide
and 10,000 tobacco-related deaths per day. Furthermore,
in the United States,43% of children aged 2-11 years are
exposed to environmental tobacco smoke, which has
been implicated in sudden infant death syndrome,low
birth weight,asthma,middle ear disease,pneumonia,
Addiction cough,and upper respiratory infection.
Eating disorders,such as anorexia nervosa,bulim-
Definition
ia nervosa, and binge eating, affect over five million
Addiction is a dependence on a behavior or sub- American women and men. Fifteen percent of young
stance that a person is powerless to stop. The term has women have substantially disordered attitudes toward
been partially replaced by the word dependencefor sub- eating and eating behaviors. More than 1,000 women die
stance abuse. Addiction has been extended,however,to each year from anorexia nervosa.
50 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitciddA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 50
A 1997 Harvard study found that an estimated 15.4
million Americans suffered from a gambling addiction.
Over half that number (7.9 million) were adolescents.
Causes and symptoms
Addiction to substances results from the interaction
of several factors:
Drug chemistry
Some substances are more addictive than others,
either because they produce a rapid and intense change in
mood; or because they produce painful withdrawal
symptoms when stopped suddenly.
Genetic factor
Some people appear to be more vulnerable to addic-
tion because their body chemistry increases their sensi-
tivity to drugs. Some forms of substance abuse and
dependenceseem to run in families; and this may be the
result of a genetic predisposition,environmental influ-
ences,or a combination of both.
Brain structure and function
Using drugs repeatedly over time changes brain
structure and function in fundamental and long-lasting
ways. Addiction comes about through an array of
changes in the brain and the strengthening of new memo-
ry connections. Evidence suggests that those long-lasting
brain changes are responsible for the distortions of cog-
nitive and emotional functioning that characterize
addicts, particularly the compulsion to use drugs.
Although the causes of addiction remain the subject of Individual development
ongoing debate and research,many experts now consider
Before the 1980s,the so-called addictive personality
addiction to be a brain disease: a condition caused by
was used to explain the development of addiction. The
persistent changes in brain structure and function. How-
addictive personality was described as escapist,impul-
ever, having this brain disease does not absolve the
sive, dependent, devious, manipulative, and self-cen-
addict of responsibility for his or her behavior,but it does
tered. Many doctors now believe that these character
explain why many addicts cannot stop using drugs by
traits develop in addicts as a result of the addiction,
sheer force of will alone.
rather than the traits being a cause of the addiction.
Social learning Diagnosis
Social learning is considered the most important sin- In addition to a preoccupation with using and
gle factor. It includes patterns of use in the addict’s fami- acquiring the abused substance,the diagnosis of addic-
ly or subculture,peer pressure,and advertising or media tion is based on five criteria:
influence. •loss of willpower
•harmful consequences
Availability •unmanageable lifestyle
Inexpensive or readily available tobacco,alcohol,or •tolerance or escalation of use
drugs produce marked increases in rates of addiction. •withdrawal symptoms upon quitting
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 51
Addiction
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 51
Crack users.Crack,a form of cocaine,is one of the most
addictive drugs.(Photograph by Roy Marsch, The Stock Mar-
ket.Reproduced by permission.)
Treatment
KEY TERMS
Treatment requires both medical and social
approaches. Substance addicts may need hospital treat-
Addiction—Dependence on a habit-forming sub-
ment to manage withdrawal symptoms. Individual or
stance or behavior that the person is powerless to
group psychotherapy is often helpful,but only after sub-
stop.
stance use has stopped. Anti-addiction medications,such
as methadoneand naltrexone,are also commonly used. Addictive personality—A concept that was for-
merly used to explain addiction as the result of
The most frequently recommended social form of
pre-existing character defects in individuals.
outpatient treatment is the twelve-step program. Such
programs are also frequently combined with psychother- Process addiction—Addiction to certain mood-
apy. According to a recent study reported by the Ameri- altering behaviors, such as eating disorders, gam-
can Psychological Association (APA),anyone,regardless bling, sexual activity, overwork, and shopping.
of his or her religious beliefs or lack of religious beliefs,
Tolerance—A condition in which an addict needs
can benefit from participation in 12-step programs such
higher doses of a substance to achieve the same
as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics Anony-
effect previously achieved with a lower dose.
mous (NA). The number of visits to 12-step self-help
Withdrawal—The unpleasant, sometimes life-
groups exceeds the number of visits to all mental health
threatening physiological changes that occur, due
professionals combined. There are twelve-step groups
to the discontinuation of use of some drugs after
for all major substance and process addictions.
prolonged, regular use.
The Twelve Steps are:
•Admit powerlessness over the addiction.
•Believe that a Power greater than oneself could restore
sanity. Prognosis
•Make a decision to turn your will and your life over to The prognosis for recovery from any addiction
the care of God,as you understand him. depends on the substance or process,the individual’s cir-
cumstances,and underlying personality structure. Poly-
•Make a searching and fearless moral inventory of self.
drug users have the worst prognosis for recovery.
•Admit to God,yourself,and another human being the
exact nature of your wrongs.
Prevention
•Become willing to have God remove all these defects
The most effective form of prevention appears to be
from your character.
a stable family that models responsible attitudes toward
•Humbly ask God to remove shortcomings. mood-altering substances and behaviors. Prevention edu-
cation programs are also widely used to inform the pub-
•Make a list of all persons harmed by your wrongs and
lic of the harmfulness of substance abuse.
become willing to make amends to them all.
•Make direct amends to such people,whenever possible
Resources
except when to do so would injure them or others.
BOOKS
•Continue to take personal inventory and promptly
“Psychiatric Disorders:Drug Dependence.”In The Merck Man-
admit any future wrongdoings. ual of Diagnosis and Therapy.Vol. 1. Ed. Robert Berkow,
•Seek to improve contact with a God of the individual’s et al. Rahway,N.J.:Merck Research Laboratories,1992.
understanding through meditationand prayer. Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Substance Abuse:The
Nation’s #1 Problem.Princeton,N.J.,2001.
•Carry the message of spiritual awakening to others and
PERIODICALS
practice these principles in all your affairs.
Kalivas,Peter. “Drug Addiction:To the Cortex..and beyond”
The American Journal of Psychiatryvolume 158,issue 3,
Alternative treatment (March 2001).
Kelly,Timothy. “Addiction:A Booming $800 Billion Industry.
Acupunctureand homeopathyhave been used to
The World and I(July 1,2000).
treat withdrawal symptoms. Meditation,yoga,and reiki
Leshner,Alan. “Addiction is a Brain Disease”Issues in Science
healing have been recommended for process addictions, and Technologyvolume 17,issue 3,(April 1,2001).
however,the success of these programs has not been well Mattas-Curry,L. “12-step self-help programs proved success-
documented through controlled studies. ful regardless of participants’religious background,study
52 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
noitciddA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 52
suggests.”APA Monitor Online.volume 30,number 11,
(December 1999). <http://www.apa.org/monitor/>. KEY TERMS
ORGANIZATIONS
Al-Anon Family Groups. Box 182,Madison Square Station, Gland—A collection of cells whose function is to
New York,NY 10159. <http://www.Al-Anon Alateen.org>. release certain chemicals, or hormones, which are
Alcoholics Anonymous World Services,Inc. Box 459,Grand important to the functioning of other, sometimes
Central Station,New York,NY 10163. <http://www. distantly located, organs or body systems.
alcoholics-anonymous.org>.
Hormone—A chemical produced in one part of
American Anorexia Bulimina Association. <http://www.aab
ainc.org/>. the body, which travels to another part of the body
American Psychiatric Association. <http://www.pscyh.org>. in order to exert its effect.
Center for On-Line Addiction. <http://www.netaddiction.com/>.
eGambling:Electronic Joural of Gambling Issues. <http://
www.camh.net/egambling/main.html>.
National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Colum-
•the functioning of muscles
bia University. <http://www.casacolumbia.org/>.
National Alliance on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence,Inc. •normal kidney function
12 West 21st St.,New York,NY 10010. (212)206-6770.
•production of blood cells
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information.
<http://www.health.org>. •the normal processes involved in maintaining the skele-
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) tal system
6000 Executive Boulevard,Bethesda,Maryland 20892-
•proper functioning of the brain and nerves
7003. <http://www.niaaa.nih.gov>.
•the normal responses of the immune system
Bill Asenjo,MS,CRC Aldosterone, also produced by the adrenal cortex,
plays a central role in maintaining the appropriate pro-
portions of water and salts in the body. When this bal-
ance is upset,the volume of blood circulating throughout
the body will fall dangerously low, accompanied by a
Addison’s disease drop in blood pressure.
Addison’s disease is also called primary adrenocorti-
Definition
cal insufficiency. In other words,some process interferes
Addison’s disease is a disorder involving disrupted directly with the ability of the adrenal cortex to produce
functioning of the part of the adrenal gland called the its hormones. Levels of both cortisol and aldosterone
cortex. This results in decreased production of two drop, and numerous functions throughout the body are
important chemicals (hormones) normally released by disrupted.
the adrenal cortex:cortisol and aldosterone.
Addison’s disease occurs in about four in every
100,000 people. It strikes both men and women of all ages.
Description
Causes and symptoms
The adrenals are two glands, each perched on the
upper part of the two kidneys. The outer part of the gland The most common cause of Addison’s disease is the
is known as the cortex; the inner part is known as the destruction and/or shrinking (atrophy) of the adrenal
medulla. Each of these parts of the adrenal gland is cortex. In about 70% of all cases, this atrophy is
responsible for producing different types of hormones. believed to occur due to an autoimmune disorder. In an
Cortisol is a very potent hormone produced by the autoimmune disorder,the immune system of the body,
adrenal cortex. It is involved in regulating the functioning responsible for identifying foreign invaders such as
of nearly every type of organ and tissue throughout the viruses or bacteria and killing them,accidentally begins
body, and is considered to be one of the few hormones to identify the cells of the adrenal cortex as foreign,and
absolutely necessary for life. Cortisol is involved in: destroy them. In about 20% of all cases,destruction of
the adrenal cortex is caused by tuberculosis. The
•the very complex processing and utilization of many nutri-
remaining cases of Addison’s disease may be caused by
ents,including sugars (carbohydrates),fats,and proteins
fungal infections,such as histoplasmosis,coccidiomy-
•the normal functioning of the circulatory system and cosis, and cryptococcosis, which affect the adrenal
the heart gland by producing destructive, tumor-like masses
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 53
Addison’s
disease
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 53
called granulomas; a disease called amyloidosis, in pituitary to produce enough ACTH),levels of ACTH in
which a starchy substance called amyloid is deposited in the blood are examined. Normal or high levels of
abnormal places throughout the body,interfering with ACTH indicate that the pituitary is working properly,
the function of whatever structure it is present within; or but the adrenal cortex is not responding normally to the
invasion of the adrenal glands by cancer. presence of ACTH. This confirms the diagnosis of
Addison’s disease.
In about 75% of all patients, Addison’s disease
tends to be a very gradual,slowly developing disease.
Significant symptoms are not noted until about 90% of Treatment
the adrenal cortex has been destroyed. The most com-
Treatment of Addison’s disease involves replacing
mon symptoms include fatigue and loss of energy,
the missing or low levels of cortisol. In the case of Addis-
decreased appetite, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
onian crisis,this will be achieved by injecting a potent
abdominal pain,weight loss,muscle weakness,dizzi-
form of steroid preparation through a needle placed in a
ness when standing, dehydration, unusual areas of
vein (intravenous or IV). Dehydration and salt loss will
darkened (pigmented) skin,and dark freckling. As the
also be treated by administering carefully balanced solu-
disease progresses,the patient may appear to have very
tions through the IV. Dangerously low blood pressure
tanned,or bronzed skin,with darkening of the lining of
may require special medications to safely elevate it until
the mouth,vagina,and rectum,and dark pigmentation
the steroids take effect.
of the area around the nipples (aereola). As dehydration
becomes more severe,the blood pressure will continue Patients with Addison’s disease will need to take a
to drop and the patient will feel increasingly weak and steroid preparation (hydrocortisone) and a replacement
light-headed. Some patients have psychiatric symp- for aldosterone (fludrocortisone) by mouth for the rest of
toms,including depression and irritability. Women lose their lives. When a patient has an illness which causes
pubic and underarm hair,and stop having normal men- nausea and vomiting (such that they cannot hold down
strual periods. their medications),he or she will need to enter a medical
facility where IV medications can be administered.
When a patient becomes ill with an infection, or
When a patient has any kind of infection or injury, the
stressed by an injury, the disease may suddenly and
normal dose of hydrocortisone will need to be doubled.
rapidly progress,becoming life-threatening. Symptoms
of this “Addisonian crisis” include abnormal heart
rhythms,severe pain in the back and abdomen,uncon- Prognosis
trollable nausea and vomiting,a drastic drop in blood
Prognosis for patients appropriately treated with
pressure, kidney failure, and unconsciousness. About
hydrocortisone and aldosterone is excellent. These
25% of all Addison’s disease patients are identified due
patients can expect to enjoy a normal lifespan. Without
to the development of Addisonian crisis.
treatment, or with substandard treatment, patients are
always at risk of developing Addisonian crisis.
Diagnosis
Many patients do not recognize the slow progres- Resources
sion of symptoms and the disease is ultimately identified
BOOKS
when a physician notices the areas of increased pigmen- Williams,Gordon H.,and Robert G. Dluhy. “Hypofunction of
tation of the skin. Once suspected, a number of blood the Adrenal Cortex.”In Harrison’s Principles of Internal
tests can lead to the diagnosis of Addison’s disease. It is Medicine,ed. Anthony S. Fauci,et al. New York:
not sufficient to demonstrate low blood cortisol levels, McGraw-Hill,1997.
as normal levels of cortisol vary quite widely. Instead,
PERIODICALS
patients are given a testing dose of another hormone
Brosnan,C. M.,and N. F. C. Gowing. “Addison’s Disease.”
called corticotropin (ACTH). ACTH is produced in the
British Medical Journal312,no. 7038 (27 Apr. 1996):
body by the pituitary gland,and normally acts by pro- 1085+.
moting growth within the adrenal cortex and stimulating Oelkers,Wolfgang. “Adrenal Insufficiency.”New England
the production and release of cortisol. In Addison’s dis- Journal of Medicine335,no. 16 (17 Oct. 1996):1206+.
ease,even a dose of synthetic ACTH does not increase
ORGANIZATIONS
cortisol levels.
National Adrenal Disease Foundation. 505 Northern Boule-
To distinguish between primary adrenocortical vard,Suite 200,Great Neck,NY 11021. (516) 487-4992.
insufficiency (Addison’s disease) and secondary
adrenocortical insufficiency (caused by failure of the Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt,MD
54 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
esaesid
s’nosiddA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 54
Adenoid hyperplasia KEY TERMS
Definition
Eustacian tube—A tube connecting the middle ear
Adenoid hyperplasia is the overenlargement of the with the back of the nose, allowing air pressure to
lymph glands located above the back of the mouth. equalize within the ear whenever it opens, such as
with yawning.
Description Hyperplastic—Overgrown.
Hypertrophy—Overgrowth.
Located at the back of the mouth above and below
the soft palate are two pairs of lymph glands. The tonsils Strep throat—An infection of the throat caused by
below are clearly visible behind the back teeth; the ade- bacteria of the Streptococcusfamily, which causes
noids lie just above them and are hidden from view by the tonsillitis.
palate. Together these four arsenals of immune defense Ulcerated—Damaged so that the surface tissue is
guard the major entrance to the body from foreign lost and/or necrotic (dead).
invaders—the germs we breathe and eat. In contrast to the
rest of the body’s tissues, lymphoid tissue reaches its
greatest size in mid-childhood and recedes thereafter. In
this way children are best able to develop the immunities
Diagnosis
they need to survive in a world full of infectious diseases.
A simple tongue blade depressing the tongue allows
Beyond its normal growth pattern,lymphoid tissue
an adequate view of the tonsils. Enlarged tonsils may
grows excessively (hypertrophies) during an acute infec-
have deep pockets (crypts) containing dead tissue
tion,as it suddenly increases its immune activity to fight
(necrotic debris). Viewing adenoids requires a small mir-
off the invaders. Often it does not completely return to its
ror or fiberoptic scope. A child with recurring middle ear
former size. Each subsequent infection leaves behind a
infections may well have large adenoids. A throat cul-
larger set of tonsils and adenoids. To make matters
tureor mononucleosis test will usually reveal the identi-
worse,the sponge-like structure of these hypertrophied
ty of the germ.
glands can produce safe havens for germs where the
body cannot reach and eliminate them. Before antibi-
oticsand the reduction in infectious childhood diseases Treatment
over the past few generations, tonsils and adenoids
It used to be standard practice to remove tonsils
caused greater health problems.
and/or adenoids after a few episodes of acute throat or ear
infection. The surgery is called tonsillectomy and ade-
Causes and symptoms noidectomy(T and A). Opinion changed as it was realized
that this tissue is beneficial to the development of immuni-
Most tonsil and adenoid hypertrophy is simply
ty. For instance,children without tonsils and adenoids pro-
caused by the normal growth pattern for that type of tis-
duce only half the immunity to oral poliovaccine. In addi-
sue. Less often,the hypertrophy is due to repeated throat
tion,treatment of ear and throat infections with antibiotics
infections by cold viruses,strep throat,mononucleosis,
and of recurring ear infections with surgical drainage
and in times gone by,diphtheria. The acute infections
through the ear drum (tympanostomy) has greatly reduced
are usually referred to as tonsillitis,the adenoids getting
the incidence of surgical removal of these lymph glands.
little recognition because they cannot be seen without
special instruments. Symptoms include painful, bright
red,often ulcerated tonsils,enlargement of lymph nodes Alternative treatment
(glands) beneath the jaw,fever,and general discomfort.
There are many botanical/herbal remedies that can
After the acute infection subsides,symptoms are gen- be used alone or in formulas to locally assist the tonsils
erated simply by the size of the glands. Extremely large and adenoids in their immune function at the opening of
tonsils can impair breathing and swallowing,although that the oral cavity and to tone these glands. Keeping the
is quite rare. Large adenoids can impair nose breathing Eustachian tubes open is an important contribution to
and require a child to breathe through the mouth. Because optimal function in the tonsils and adenoids. Food aller-
they encircle the only connection between the middle ear giesare often the culprits for recurring ear infections,as
and the eustachian tube,hypertrophied adenoids can also well as tonsilitis and adenoiditis. Identification and
obstruct it and cause middle ear infections. removal of the allergic food(s) can greatly assist in alle-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 55
Adenoid
hyperplasia
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 55
viating the cause of the problem. Acute tonsillitis also Description
benefits from warm saline gargles.
Adenoviruses were discovered in 1953. About 47 dif-
ferent types have been identified since then, and about
Prognosis
half of them are believed to cause human diseases. Infants
Hypertrophied adenoids are a normal part of grow- and children are most commonly affected by adenovirus-
ing up and should be respected for their important role in es. Adenovirus infections can occur throughout the year,
the development of immunity. Only when their size caus- but seem to be most common from fall to spring.
es problems by obstructing breathing or middle ear
Adenoviruses are responsible for 3-5% of acute res-
drainage do they demand intervention.
piratory infections in children and 2% of respiratory ill-
nesses in civilian adults. They are more apt to cause
Prevention
infection among military recruits and other young people
Prevention can be directed toward prompt evaluation who live in institutional environments. Outbreaks among
and appropriate treatment of sore throats to prevent over- children are frequently reported at boarding schools and
growth of adenoid tissue. Avoiding other children with summer camps.
acute respiratory illness will also reduce the spread of
these common illnesses. Acquired immunity
Most children have been infected by at least one
Resources
adenovirus by the time they reach school age. Most
BOOKS adults have acquired immunity to multiple adenovirus
Ballenger,John Jacob. Disorders of the Nose,Throat,Ear, types due to infections they had as children.
Head,and Neck.Philadelphia:Lea & Febiger,1991.
In one mode of adenovirus infection (called lytic
“Otitis Media with Effusion.”In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,
ed. Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders infection because it destroys large numbers of cells),ade-
Co.,1996. noviruses kill healthy cells and replicate up to one mil-
“Tonsils and Adenoids.”In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,ed. lion new viruses per cell killed (of which 1-5% are infec-
Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Co., tious). People with this kind of infection feel sick. In
1996. chronic or latent infection, a much smaller number of
Weil,Andrew. Natural Health,Natural Medicine.Boston: viruses are released and healthy cells can multiply more
Houghton Mifflin Co.,1995.
rapidly than they are destroyed. People who have this
PERIODICALS kind of infection don’t seem to be sick. This is probably
Laliberte,Richard. “The Tonsils Controversy.”Parents Maga- why many adults have immunity to adenoviruses without
zine,(Dec. 1995):38. realizing they have been infected.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer,MD
Childhood infections
Adenoid hypertrophy see Adenoid In children, adenoviruses most often cause acute
upper respiratory infections with feverand runny nose.
hyperplasia
Adenovirus types 1, 2, 3,5, and 6 are responsible for
Adenoid removal see Tonsillectomy and most of these infections. Occasionally more serious
adenoidectomy lower respiratory diseases, such as pneumonia, may
occur.
Adenoidectomy see Tonsillectomy and
adenoidectomy Adenoviruses also cause acute pharyngoconjunctival
fever in children. This disease is most often caused by
types 3 and 7. Symptoms, which appear suddenly and
usually disappear in less than a week,include:
•inflammation of the lining of the eyelid (conjunctivitis)
Adenovirus infections •fever
Definition
•sore throat(pharyngitis)
•runny nose
Adenoviruses are DNA viruses (small infectious
agents) that cause upper respiratory tract infections,con- •inflammation of lymph glands in the neck (cervical
junctivitis,and other infections in humans. adenitis)
56 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
snoitcefni
surivonedA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 56
Adenoviruses also cause acute diarrhea in young
children,characterized by fever and watery stools. This KEY TERMS
condition is caused by adenovirus types 40 and 41 and
can last as long as two weeks. Conjunctivitis—Inflammation of the conjunctiva,
As much as 51% of all hemorrhagic cystitis(inflam- the mucous membrane lining the inner surfaces of
mation of the bladder and of the tubes that carry urine to the eyelid and the front of the eyeball.
the bladder from the kidneys) in American and Japanese Virus—A small infectious agent consisting of a
children can be attributed to adenovirus infection. A core of genetic material (DNA or RNA) surround-
child who has hemorrhagic cystitis has bloody urine for ed by a shell of protein.
about three days, and invisible traces of blood can be
found in the urine a few days longer. The child will feel
the urge to urinate frequently—but find it difficult to do
so—for about the same length of time.
•pneumonia that doesn’t respond to antibiotic therapy
•whooping coughsyndrome when Bordetella pertussis
Adult infections
(the bacterium that causes classic whooping cough) is
In adults, the most frequently reported adenovirus not found
infection is acute respiratory disease (ARD,caused by
types 4 and 7) in military recruits. Influenza-like symp-
Causes and symptoms
toms including fever,sore throat,runny nose,and cough
are almost always present; weakness,chills,headache, Specific adenovirus infections can be traced to par-
and swollen lymph glands in the neck may also occur. ticular sources and produce distinctive symptoms. In
The symptoms typically last three to five days. general,however,adenovirus infection is caused by:
Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC,caused by ade- •inhaling airborne viruses
novirus types 8, 19, and 37) was first seen in shipyard
•getting the virus in the eyes by swimming in contami-
workers whose eyes had been slightly injured by chips of
nated water,using contaminated eye solutions or instru-
rust or paint. This inflammation of tissues lining the eye-
ments, wiping the eyes with contaminated towels, or
lid and covering the front of the eyeball can also be
rubbing the eyes with contaminated fingers.
caused by using contaminated contact lens solutions or
by drying the hands or face with a towel used by some- •not washing the hands after using the bathroom, and
one who has this infection. then touching the mouth or eyes
The inflamed,sticky eyelids characteristic of con- Symptoms common to most types of adenovirus
junctivitis develop 4-24 days after exposure and last infections include:
between one and four weeks. Only 5-8% of patients with
•cough
epidemic keratoconjunctivitis experience respiratory
•fever
symptoms. One or both eyes may be affected. As symp-
toms of conjunctivitis subside, eye pain and watering •runny nose
and blurred vision develop. These symptoms of keratitis
•sore throat
may last for several months, and about 10% of these
infections spread to at least one other member of the •watery eyes
patient’s household.
Other illnesses associated with adenovirus include: Diagnosis
•encephalitis (inflammation of the brain) and other Although symptoms may suggest the presence of
infections of the central nervous system (CNS) adenovirus, distinguishing these infections from other
•gastroenteritis (inflammation of the stomach and intes- viruses can be difficult. A definitive diagnosis is based on
tines) culture or detection of the virus in eye secretions,spu-
tum,urine,or stool.
•acute mesenteric lymphadenitis (inflammation of
lymph glands in the abdomen) The extent of infection can be estimated from the
results of blood tests that measure increases in the quan-
•chronic interstitial fibrosis (abnormal growth of con-
tity of antibodies the immune system produces to fight it.
nective tissue between cells)
Antibody levels begin to rise about a week after infection
•intussusception (a type of intestinal obstruction) occurs and remain elevated for about a year.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 57
Adenovirus
infections
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 57
Treatment Description
Treatment of adenovirus infections is usually sup- An adjustment disorder usually begins within three
portive and aimed at relieving symptoms of the illness. months of a stressful event,and ends within six months
Bed rest may be recommended along with medications to after the stressor stops. There are many different sub-
reduce fever and/or pain. (Aspirinshould not be given to types of adjustment disorders,including adjustment dis-
children because of concerns about Reye’s syndrome.) order with:
Eye infections may benefit from topical corticosteroids
•depression
to relieve symptoms and shorten the course of the dis-
•anxiety
ease. Hospitalization is usually required for severe pneu-
monia in infants and for EKC (to prevent blindness). No •mixed anxiety and depression
effective antiviral drugshave been developed.
•conduct disturbances
•mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct
Prognosis
•unspecified
Adenovirus infections are rarely fatal. Most patients
recover fully. Adjustment disorders are very common and can
affect anyone,regardless of gender,age,race,or lifestyle.
By definition, an adjustment disorder is short-lived,
Prevention
unless a person is faced with a chronic recurring crisis
Practicing good personal hygiene and avoiding peo-
(such as a child who is repeatedly abused). In such cases,
ple with infectious illnesses can reduce the risk of devel-
the adjustment disorder may last more than six months.
oping adenovirus infection. Proper handwashing can pre-
vent the spread of the virus by oral-fecal transmission.
Causes and symptoms
Sterilization of instruments and solutions used in the eye
can prevent the spread of EKC,as can adequate chlorina- An adjustment disorder occurs when a person can’t
tion of swimming pools. cope with a stressful event and develops emotional or
A vaccine containing live adenovirus types 4 and 7 behavioral symptoms. The stressful event can be anything:
is used to control disease in military recruits,but it is not it might be just one isolated incident,or a string of prob-
recommended or available for civilian use. Vaccines pre- lems that wears the person down. The stressmight be any-
pared from purified subunits of adenovirus are under thing from a car accident or illness,to a divorce,or even a
investigation. certain time of year (such as Christmas or summer).
People with adjustment disorder may have a wide
Resources variety of symptoms. How those symptoms combine
depend on the particular subtype of adjustment disorder
BOOKS
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S. and on the individual’s personality and psychological
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997. defenses. Symptoms normally include some (but not all)
Mandell,Gerald L.,ed.,et al. Principles and Practices of Infec- of the following:
tious Diseases.New York:Churchill Livingstone,1995.
•hopelessness
Professional Guide to Diseases.5th ed. Springhouse,PA:
Springhouse Corporation,1995. •sadness
•crying
Maureen Haggerty
•anxiety
•worry
•headaches or stomachaches
•withdrawal
Adjustment disorders
•inhibition
Definition •truancy
An adjustment disorder is a debilitating reaction, •vandalism
usually lasting less than six months,to a stressful event
•reckless driving
or situation. It is not the same thing as post-traumatic
•fighting
stress disorder(PTSD),which usually occurs in reac-
tion to a life-threatening event and can be longer lasting. •other destructive acts
58 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
sredrosid
tnemtsujdA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 58
Diagnosis
KEY TERMS
It is extremely important that a thorough evaluation
rule out other more serious mental disorders,since the
Multiple sclerosis—A progressive disorder of the
treatment for adjustment disorder may be very different
central nervous system in which scattered patches
than for other mental problems.
of the protective sheath covering the nerves is
In order to be diagnosed as a true adjustment disor-
destroyed. The disease, which causes progressive
der,the level of distress must be more severe than what
paralysis, is marked by periods of exacerbation
would normally be expected in response to the stressor,
and remission. There is no cure.
or the symptoms must significantly interfere with a per-
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)—A specific
son’s social,job,or school functioning. Normal expres-
form of anxiety that begins after a life-threatening
sion of grief,in bereavement for instance,is not consid-
event, such as rape, a natural disaster, or combat-
ered an adjustment disorder.
related trauma.
Treatment
Psychotherapy (counseling) is the treatment of
choice for adjustment disorders,since the symptoms are PERIODICALS
an understandable reaction to a specific stress. The type Newcorn,Jeffrey H.,and James Strain. “Adjustment Disorder
of therapy depends on the mental health expert, but it in Children and Adolescents.”Journal of the American
usually is short-term treatment that focuses on resolving Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry31 (Mar.
the immediate problem. 1992):318-27.
Therapy usually will help clients:
Carol A. Turkington
•develop coping skills
•understand how the stressor has affected their lives
•develop alternate social or recreational activities
Family or couples therapy may be helpful in some Adrenal gland cancer
cases. Medications are not usually used to treat adjust-
Definition
ment disorders,although sometimes a few days or weeks
of an anti-anxiety drug can control anxiety or sleeping Adrenal gland cancers are rare cancers occuring in
problems. the endocrine tissue of the adrenals. They are character-
ized by overproduction of adrenal gland hormones.
Self-help groups aimed at a specific problem (such
as recovering from divorce or job loss) can be extremely
helpful to people suffering from an adjustment disorder. Description
Social support,which is usually an important part of self-
Cancers of the adrenal gland are very rare. The
help groups,can lead to a quicker recovery.
adrenal gland is a hormone producing endocrine gland
with two main parts, the cortex and the medulla. The
Prognosis main hormone of the adrenal cortex is cortisol and the
main hormone of the adrenal medulla is epinephrine.
Most people recover completely from adjustment
When tumors develop in the adrenal gland,they secrete
disorders,especially if they had no previous history of
excess amounts of these hormones. A cancerthat arises
mental problems,and have a stable home life with strong
in the adrenal cortex is called an adrenocortical carcino-
social support. People with progressive or cyclic disor-
ders (such as multiple sclerosis) may experience an ma and can produce high blood pressure, weight gain,
excess body hair,weakening of the bones and diabetes. A
adjustment disorder with each exacerbation period.
cancer in the adrenal medulla is called a pheochromocy-
tomaand can cause high blood pressure,headache,pal-
Resources
pitations,and excessive perspiration. Although these can-
BOOKS cers can happen at any age,most occur in young adults.
Horowitz,Mardi J. Stress Response Syndromes:PTSD,Grief and
Adjustment Disorders.Northvale,NJ:Jason Aronson,1997.
Causes and symptoms
Luther,Suniya G.,Jacob A. Burack,and Dante Cicchetti. Develop-
mental Psychopathology:Perspectives on Adjustment,Risk, It is not known what causes adrenal gland cancer,
and Disorder.London:Cambridge University Press,1997. but some cases are associated with hereditary diseases.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 59
Adrenal
gland
cancer
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 59
Alternative treatment
KEY TERMS
As with any form of cancer,all conventional treat-
ment options should be considered and applied as appro-
Cortisol—A hormone produced by the adrenal
priate. Nutritional support,as well as supporting the func-
cortex. It is partially responsible for regulating
tioning of the entire person diagnosed with adrenal gland
blood sugar levels.
cancer through homeopathic medicine,acupuncture,vit-
Diabetes—A disease characterized by low blood amin and mineral supplementation,and herbal medicine,
sugar. can benefit recovery and enhance quality of life.
Epinephrine—A hormone produced by the adren-
al medulla. It is important in the response to stress Prognosis
and partially regulates heart rate and metabolism. The prognosis for adrenal gland cancer is variable.
It is also called adrenaline. For localized pheochromocytomas the 5-year survival rate
Laparoscopy—The insertion of a tube through the is 95%. This rate decreases with aggressive tumors that
abdominal wall. It can be used to visualize the have metastasized. The prognosis for adrenal cortical can-
inside of the abdomen and for surgical procedures. cer is not as good with a 5-year survival rate of 10-35%.
Prevention
Since so little is known about the cause of adrenal
Symptoms of adrenal cancer are related to the specific
gland cancer,it is not known if it can be prevented.
hormones produced by that tumor. An adrenocortical car-
cinoma typically secretes high amounts of cortisol,pro-
Resources
ducing Cushing’s Syndrome. This syndrome produces
progressive weight gain, rounding of the face, and BOOKS
increased blood pressure. Women can experience men- Norton,J. A. “Adrenal Tumors.”In Cancer,Principles and
strual cycle alterations and men can experience feminiza- Practice of Oncology.Ed. V. T. DeVita,S. Hellman,and
tion. The symptoms for pheochromocytoma include S. A. Rosenberg. Philadelphia:Lippincott-Raven,1997.
hypertension, acidosis, unexplained fever and weight OTHER
loss. Because of the hormones produced by this type of Endocrine Web.<http://www.endocrineweb.com>.
tumor,anxietyis often a feature also.
Cindy L. A. Jones,PhD
Adrenal gland removal see Adrenalectomy
Diagnosis
Diagnosis for adrenal cancer usually begins with
blood tests to evaluate the hormone levels. These hor-
mones include epinephrine,cortisol,and testosterone. It
also includes magnetic resonance imaging,and com-
Adrenal gland scan
puted tomography scansto determine the extent of the
disease. Urine and blood tests can be done to detect the Definition
high levels of hormone secreted by the tumor.
The adrenal gland scan is a nuclear medicine evalua-
tion of the medulla (inner tissue) of the adrenal gland.
Treatment
Purpose
Treatment is aimed at removing the tumor by
The adrenal glands are a pair of small organs located
surgery. In some cases,this can be done by laparoscopy.
just above the kidney,which contain two types of tissue.
Surgery is sometimes followed by chemotherapyand/or
The adrenal cortex produces hormones that affect water
radiation therapy. Because the surgery removes the
balance and metabolism in the body. The adrenal medul-
source of many important hormones,hormones must be
la produces adrenaline and noradrenaline (also called
supplemented following surgery. If adrenocortical cancer
epinepherine and norepinepherine).
recurs or has spread to other parts of the body (metasta-
sized), additional surgery may be done followed by An adrenal gland scan is done when too much
chemotherapy using the drug mitotane. adrenaline and noradrenaline is produced in the body and
60 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
nacs
dnalg
lanerdA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 60
a tumor in the adrenal gland is suspected. One such situa-
tion in which a tumor might be suspected is when high KEY TERMS
blood pressure (hypertension) does not respond to med-
ication. Tumors that secrete adrenaline and noradrenaline Adrenal cortex—The outer tissue of the adrenal
can also be found outside the adrenal gland. An adrenal gland. It produces a group of chemically related
gland scan usually covers the abdomen,chest,and head. hormones called corticosteroids that control min-
eral and water balance in the body and include
Precautions aldosterone and cortisol.
Adrenal medulla—The inner tissue of the adrenal
Adrenal gland scans are not recommended for preg-
gland. It produces the hormones adrenaline and
nant women because of the potential harm to the devel-
noradrenaline.
oping fetus. A pregnant woman should discuss with her
doctor the risks of the procedure against the benefits of Lugol’s solution—A strong iodine solution.
the information it can provide in evaluating her individ-
ual medical situation.
People who have recently undergone tests that use
barium must wait until the barium has been eliminated Normal results
from their system in order to obtain accurate results from Normal results will show no unusual areas of hor-
the adrenal gland scan. mone secretion and no tumors.
Description Abnormal results
Abnormal results will show evidence of a tumor
The adrenal gland scan takes several days. On the
where there is excessive secretion of adrenaline or nora-
first day,a radiopharmaceutical is injected intravenously
drenaline. Over 90% of these tumors are in the abdomen.
into the patient. On the second,third,and fourth day the
patient is positioned under the camera for imaging. The
scanning time each day takes approximately 30 minutes. Resources
It is essential that the patient remain still during imaging.
BOOKS
Occasionally, the scanning process may involve A Manual of Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests.5th ed. Ed.
fewer than three days, or it may continue several days Francis Fishback. Philadelphia:Lippincott,1996.
longer. The area scanned extends from the pelvis and
lower abdomen to the lower chest. Sometimes the upper Tish Davidson
legs,thighs,and head are also included.
Adrenal hypofunction see Addison’s disease
Preparation Adrenal insufficiency see Addison’s disease
For two days before and ten days after the injection
of the radiopharmaceutical, patients are given either
Lugol’s solution or potassium iodine. This prevents the
thyroid from taking up radioactive iodine and interfering
with the scan. Adrenal virilism
Definition
Aftercare
Adrenal virilism is the development or premature
The patient should not feel any adverse effects of the development of male secondary sexual characteristics
test and can resume normal activity immediately. Follow- caused by male sex hormones (androgens) excessively
up tests that might be ordered include a nuclear scan of produced by the adrenal gland. This disorder can occur
the bones or kidney,a computed tomography scan (CT) before birth and can lead to sexual abnormalities in new-
of the adrenals,or an ultrasound of the pelvic area. borns. It can also occur in girls and women later in life.
Risks Description
The main risk associated with this test is to the fetus In the normal human body, there are two adrenal
of a pregnant woman. glands. They are small structures that lie on top of the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 61
Adrenal
virilism
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 61
doctors who treat disorders of the internal organs
KEY TERMS (internists) and doctors who specialize in treating the
reproductive system of women (gynecologists) may also
Glucocorticoid—A hormone produced by the be able to help patients with this disorder.
adrenal gland; this hormone leads to an increase Diagnosis involves performing many laboratory
in blood sugar and creation of sugar molecules by tests on blood samples from the patient. These tests mea-
the liver. sure the concentration of different hormones. Different
Hydrocortisone—A hormone in the group of glu- abnormalities of the adrenal gland produce a different
cocorticoid hormones. pattern of hormonal abnormalities. These tests can also
help determine if the problem is adrenal or ovarian. If a
Prednisone—A drug that functions as a glucocorti-
tumor is suspected,special x rays may be done to visual-
coid hormone.
ize the tumor in the body. Final diagnosis may depend on
obtaining a tissue sample from the tumor (biopsy),and
examining it under a microscope in order to verify its
characteristics.
kidneys. The adrenal glands produce many hormones
that regulate body functions. These hormones include
Treatment
androgens,or male hormones. Androgens are produced
in normal girls and women. Sometimes,one or both of Adrenal virilism caused by adrenal hyperplasia is
the adrenal glands becomes enlarged or overactive,pro- treated with daily doses of a glucocorticoid. Usually
ducing more than the usual amount of androgens. The prednisone is the drug of choice,but in infants hydrocor-
excess androgens create masculine characteristics. tisone is usually given. Laboratory tests are usually need-
ed from time to time to adjust the dosage. Girls with
pseudohermaphrodism may require surgery to make their
Causes and symptoms
external sex organs appear more normal. If a tumor is
In infants and children, adrenal virilism is usually causing the disorder, the treatment will depend on the
the result of adrenal gland enlargement that is present at type and location of the tumor. Information about the
birth. This is called congenital adrenal hyperplasia. tumor cell type and the spread of the tumor is used to
The cause is usually a genetic problem that leads to decide the best kind of treatment for a particular patient.
severe enzyme deficiencies. In rare cases,adrenal viril- If the tumor is cancerous,the patient will require special
ism is caused by an adrenal gland tumor. The tumor can treatment depending on how far the cancer has
be benign (adrenal adenoma) or cancerous (adrenal car- advanced. Treatment can be a combination of surgery,
cinoma). Sometimes virilism is caused by a type of medications used to kill cancer cells (chemotherapy),
tumor on a woman’s ovary (arrhenoblastoma). and x rays or other high energy rays used to kill cancer
cells (radiation therapy). Sometimes the doctor must
Newborn girls with adrenal virilism have external
remove the adrenal gland and the surrounding tissues. If
sex organs that seem to be a mixture of male and female
the tumor is benign,then surgically removing the tumor
organs (called female pseudohermaphrodism). Newborn
may be the best option.
boys with the disorder have enlarged external sex organs,
and these organs develop at an abnormally rapid pace.
Prognosis
Children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia begin
growing abnormally fast,but they stop growing earlier Ongoing glucocorticoid treatment usually controls
than normal. Later in childhood,they are typically short- adrenal virilism in cases of adrenal hyperplasia,but there
er than normal but have well-developed trunks. is no cure. If a cancerous tumor has caused the disorder,
Women with adrenal virilization may develop facial patients have a better prognosis if they have an early stage
hair. Typically,their menstrual cycles are infrequent or of cancer that is diagnosed quickly and has not spread.
absent. They may also develop a deeper voice, a more
prominent Adam’s apple,and other masculine signs. Resources
BOOKS
Diagnosis Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Endocrinologists, doctors who specialize in the Little,M.,and D. C. Garrell. Encyclopedia of Health; The
diagnosis and treatment of glandular disorders,have the Endocrine System:The Healthy Body.Chelsea House,
most expertise to deal with adrenal virilization. Some 1990.
62 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
msiliriv
lanerdA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 62
PERIODICALS on only one of the adrenal glands,the incision will run
Willensy,D. “The Endocrine System.”American Health(Apr. under just the right or the left side of the rib cage. Some-
1996):92-3. times a vertical incision in the middle of the abdomen
provides a better approach, especially if both adrenal
Richard H. Lampert glands are involved.
In the posterior approach,the surgeon cuts into the
back,just beneath the rib cage. If both glands are to be
removed,an incision is made on each side of the body.
This approach is the most direct route to the adrenal
Adrenalectomy
glands,but it does not provide quite as clear a view of the
surrounding structures as the anterior approach.
Definition
In the flank approach, the surgeon cuts into the
Adrenalectomy is the surgical removal of one or
patient’s side. This is particularly useful in massively obese
both of the adrenal glands. The adrenal glands are paired
patients. If both glands need to be removed,the surgeon
endocrine glands, one located above each kidney, that
must remove one gland,repair the surgical wound,turn the
produce hormones such as epinephrine,norepinephrine,
patient onto the other side,and repeat the entire process.
androgens,estrogens,aldosterone,and cortisol. Adrena-
The last approach involves an incision into the chest
lectomy is usually performed by conventional (open)
cavity,either with or without part of the incision into the
surgery, but in selected patients surgeons may use
abdominal cavity. It is used when the surgeon anticipates
laparoscopy. With laparoscopy,adrenalectomy can be
a very large tumor,or if the surgeon needs to examine or
accomplished through four very small incisions.
remove nearby structures as well.
Purpose
Laparoscopic adrenalectomy
Adrenalectomy is usually advised for patients with
This technique does not require the surgeon to open
tumors of the adrenal glands. Adrenal gland tumors may
the body cavity. Instead,four small incisions (about 1/2
be malignant or benign,but all typically excrete excessive
in diameter each) are made into a patient’s flank, just
amounts of one or more hormones. A successful proce-
under the rib cage. A laparoscope,which enables the sur-
dure will aid in correcting hormone imbalances,and may
geon to visualize the inside of the abdominal cavity on a
also remove cancerous tumors that can invade other parts
television monitor,is placed through one of the incisions.
of the body. Occasionally,adrenalectomy may be recom-
The other incisions are for tubes that carry miniaturized
mended when hormones produced by the adrenal glands
versions of surgical tools. These tools are designed to be
aggravate another condition such as breast cancer.
operated by manipulations that the surgeon makes out-
side the body.
Precautions
The adrenal glands are fed by numerous blood ves- Preparation
sels,so surgeons need to be alert to extensive bleeding
Most aspects of preparation are the same as in other
during surgery. In addition,the adrenal glands lie close to
major operations. In addition,hormone imbalances are
one of the body’s major blood vessels (the vena cava),
often a major challenge. Whenever possible,physicians
and to the spleen and the pancreas. The surgeon needs to
will try to correct hormone imbalances through medica-
remove the gland(s) without damaging any of these
tion in the days or weeks before surgery. Adrenal tumors
important and delicate organs.
may cause other problems such as hypertensionor inad-
equate potassium in the blood,and these problems also
Description should be resolved if possible before surgery is per-
formed. Therefore,a patient may take specific medicines
Open adrenalectomy
for days or weeks before surgery.
The surgeon may operate from any of four direc-
Most adrenal tumors can be imaged very well with a
tions,depending on the exact problem and the patient’s
CT scan or MRI,and benign tumors tend to look differ-
body type.
ent on these tests than do cancerous tumors. Surgeons
In the anterior approach, the surgeon cuts into the may order a CT scan,MRI,or scintigraphy (viewing of
abdominal wall. Usually the incision will be horizontal, the location of a tiny amount of radioactive agent) to help
just under the rib cage. If the surgeon intends to operate locate exactly where the tumor is.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 63
Adrenalectomy
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 63
the surgery, or both.These can include problems with
KEY TERMS wound healing itself, blood pressure fluctuations, and
other metabolic problems.
Laparoscope—An instrument that enables the sur- Other risks are typical of many operations.These
geon to see inside the abdominal cavity by means include:
of a thin tube that carries an image to a television
•bleeding
monitor.
•damage to adjacent organs (spleen,pancreas)
Pancreas—An organ that secretes a number of
digestive hormones and also secretes insulin to •loss of bowel function
regulate blood sugar. •blood clots in the lungs
Pheochromocytoma—A tumor of specialized cells •lung problems
of the adrenal gland.
•surgical infections
Spleen—An organ that traps and breaks down red
•pain
blood cells at the end of their useful life and man-
ufactures some key substances used by the •extensive scarring
immune system.
Resources
Vena cava—The large vein that drains directly into
the heart after gathering incoming blood from the BOOKS
entire body. Bradley,Edward L.,III. The Patient’s Guide to Surgery.
Philadelphia:University of Pennsylvania Press,1994.
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.Ed. Anthony S.
Fauci,et al. New York:McGraw-Hill,1997.
Little,M.,and D. C. Garrell. The Endocrine System:The
The day before surgery,patients will probably have
Healthy Body.Chelsea House,1990.
an enema to clear the bowels. In patients with lung prob-
lems or clotting problems,physicians may advise special
Richard H. Lampert
preparations.
Janis O. Flores
Aftercare Adrenocortical insufficiency see Addison’s
disease
Patients stay in the hospital for various lengths of
time after adrenalectomy. The longest hospital stays are
required for open surgery using an anterior approach;
hospital stays of about three days are indicated for open
surgery using the posterior approach or for laparoscopic
adrenalectomy. Adrenocorticotropic hormone
The special concern after adrenalectomy is the test
patient’s hormone balance. There may be several sets of
lab tests to define hormone problems and monitor the Definition
results of drug treatment. In addition, blood pressure
Adrenocorticotropic hormone test (also known as an
problems and infections are more common after removal
ACTH test or a corticotropin test) measures pituitary
of certain types of adrenal tumors.
gland function.
As with most open surgery,surgeons are also con-
cerned about blood clots forming in the legs and travel-
Purpose
ing to the lungs (venous thromboembolism),bowel prob-
lems,and postoperative pain. With laparoscopic adrena- The pituitary gland produces the hormone ACTH,
lectomy,these problems are somewhat less difficult,but which stimulates the outer layer of the adrenal gland (the
they are still present. adrenal cortex). ACTH causes the release of the hormones
hydrocortisone (cortisol),aldosterone,and androgen. The
most important of these hormones released is cortisol.
Risks
The ACTH test is used to determine if too much cortisol
The special risks of adrenalectomy involve major is being produced (Cushing’s syndrome) or if not
hormone imbalances,caused by the underlying disease, enough cortisol is being produced (Addison’s disease).
64 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
tset
enomroh
ciportocitroconerdA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 64
Precautions
KEY TERMS
ACTH has diurnal variation,meaning that the levels
of this hormone vary according to the time of day. The
Adrenal glands—A pair of endocrine glands that
highest levels occur in the morning hours. Testing for
lie on top of the kidneys.
normal secretion,as well as for Cushing’s disease,may
require multiple samples. For sequential follow-up, a Pituitary gland—The most important of the
blood sample analyzed for ACTH should always be endocrine glands, glands that release hormones
drawn at the same time each day. directly into the bloodstream; sometimes called
the master gland.
ACTH can be directly measured by an analyzing
method (immunoassay) in many large laboratories. How-
ever,smaller laboratories are usually not equipped to per-
form this test and they may need to send the blood sam-
ple to a larger laboratory. Because of this delay,results an injection of ACTH,which normally stimulates the
may take several days to obtain. secretion of hydrocortisone.
Preparation
Description
A person’s ACTH level is determined from a blood
ACTH production is partly controlled by an area in
sample. The patient must fast from midnight until the test
the center of the brain (the hypothalamus) and partly
the next morning. This means that the patient cannot eat
controlled by the level of cortisol in the blood. When
or drink anything after midnight except water. The patient
ACTH levels are too high,cortisol production increases
must also avoid radioisotope scanning tests or recently
to suppress ACTH release from the pituitary gland. If
administered radioisotopes prior to the blood test.
ACTH levels are too low, the hypothalamus produces
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) to stimulate the
Risks
pituitary gland to make more ACTH. ACTH levels rise in
response to stress, emotions, injury, infection, burns, The risks associated with this test are minimal. They
surgery,and decreased blood pressure. may include slight bleeding from the location where the
blood was drawn. The patient may feel faint or lighthead-
Cushing’s syndrome ed after the blood is drawn. Sometimes the patient may
have an accumulation of blood under the puncture site
Cushing’s syndrome is caused by an abnormally high
(hematoma) after the test.
level of circulating hydrocortisone. The high level may be
the result of an adrenal gland tumor or enlargement of
both adrenal glands due to a pituitary tumor. The high Normal results
level of hydrocortisone may be the result of taking corti-
Each laboratory will have its own set of normal val-
costeroid drugs for a long time. Corticosteroid drugs are
ues for this test. The normal values can range from:
widely used for inflammation in disorders like rheuma-
Morning (4-8 A.M.) 8-100 pg/mL or 10-80 ng/L (SI units)
toid arthritis,inflammatory bowel disease,and asthma.
Evening (8-10 P.M.) less than 50 pg/mL or less than 50
ng/L (SI units)
Addison’s disease
Addison’s disease is a rare disorder in which Abnormal results
symptoms are caused by a deficiency of hydrocorti-
In Cushing’s syndrome,high levels of ACTH may
sone and aldosterone. The most common cause of this
be caused by ACTH-producing tumors. These tumors
disease is an autoimmune disorder. The immune sys-
may be either in the pituitary or in another area (like
tem normally fights foreign invaders in the body like
tumors from lung cancer or ovarian cancer). Low
bacteria. In an autoimmune disorder,the immune sys-
ACTH levels may be caused by adrenal enlargement due
tems attacks the body. In this case,the immune system
to high levels of cortisol and feedback to the pituitary.
produces antibodies that attack the adrenal glands.
Addison’s disease generally progresses slowly, with In Addison’s disease,high levels of ACTH may be
symptoms developing gradually over months or years. caused by adrenal gland diseases. These diseases decrease
However,acute episodes,called Addisonian crises,are adrenal hormones and the pituitary attempts to increase
brought on by infection,injury,or other stresses. Diag- functioning. Low levels of ACTH may occur because of
nosis is generally made if the patient fails to respond to decreased pituitary function.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 65
Adrenocorticotropic
hormone
test
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 65
Resources
KEY TERMS
BOOKS
Jacobs,David S.,et al. Laboratory Test Handbook.4th ed. New
York:Lexi-Comp Inc.,1996. Amniocentesis—The collection of amniotic fluid
Pagana,Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and through a needle inserted through the abdomen.
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis:Mosby,Inc.,1998. Used to collect fetal cells for genetic analysis.
Ataxia—Loss of coordination of muscular move-
Janis O. Flores
ment.
Adrenogenital syndrome seeAdrenal virilism Hypertonia—Having excessive muscular tone.
Myelin—A layer that encloses nerve cells and
some axons and is made largely of lipids and
lipoproteins.
Neuropathy—A disease or abnormality of the
Adrenoleukodystrophy peripheral nerves.
Definition
Adrenoleukodystrophy is a rare genetic disease
muscle tone, enlarged liver, and adrenal dysfunction.
characterized by a loss of myelin surrounding nerve cells
Neonatal ALD usually progresses rapidly.
in the brain and progressive adrenal gland dysfunction.
Causes and symptoms
Description
The genetic defect in ALD causes a decrease in the
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is a member of a
ability to degrade very long chain fatty acids. These build
group of diseases,leukodystrophies,that cause damage
up in the adrenal glands,brain,plasma,and fibroblasts.
to the myelin sheath of nerve cells. Approximately one in
The build-up of very long chain fatty acids interferes
100,000 people is affected by ALD. There are three basic
with the ability of the adrenal gland to convert choles-
forms of ALD:childhood,adult-onset,and neonatal. The
terol into steroids and causes demyelination of nerves in
childhood form of the disease is the classical form and is
the white matter of the brain. Demyelinated nerve cells
the most severe. Childhood ALD is progressive and usu-
are unable to function properly.
ally leads to total disability or death. It affects only boys
because the genetic defect is sex-linked (carried on the X
chromosome). Onset usually occurs between ages four Diagnosis
and ten and can include many different symptoms,not all
Diagnosis is made based on observed symptoms,a
of which appear together. The most common symptoms
biochemical test,and a family history. The biochemical
are behavioral problems and poor memory. Other symp-
test detects elevated levels of very long chain fatty acids
toms frequently seen are loss of vision,seizures,poorly
in samples from amniocentesis,chorionic villi,plasma,
articulated speech,difficulty swallowing,deafness,prob-
red blood cells,or fibroblasts. A family history may indi-
lems with gait and coordination,fatigue,increased skin
cate the likelihood of ALD because the disease is carried
pigmentation,and progressive dementia.
on the X-chromosome by the female lineage of families.
The adult-onset form of the disease, also called
adrenomyeloneuropathy,is milder,progresses slowly,is
Treatment
usually associated with a normal life span,and usually
appears between ages 21-35. Symptoms may include Treatment for all forms of ALD consists of treating
progressive stiffness,weakness,or paralysisof the lower the symptoms and supporting the patient with physical
limbs and loss of coordination. Brain function deteriora- therapy,psychological counseling,and special education
tion may also been seen. Women who are carriers of the in some cases. There is no cure for this disease,and there
disease occasionally experience the same symptoms,as are no drugs that can reverse demyelination of nerve and
well as others, including ataxia, hypertonia (excessive brain cells. Dietary measures consist of reducing the
muscle tone),mild peripheral neuropathy,and urinary intake of foods high in fat, which are a source of very
problems. The neonatal form affects both male and long chain fatty acids. A mixture called Lorenzo’s Oil
female infants and may produce mental retardation, has been shown to reduce the level of long chain fatty
facial abnormalities,seizures,retinal degeneration,poor acids if used long term; however,the rate of myelin loss
66 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
3yhportsydokuelonerdA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 66
is unaffected. Experimental bone marrow transplanta- This is the all-important site where oxygen passes from
tionhas not been very effective. air that is inhaled to the blood,which carries it to all parts
of the body. Any form of lung injury that damages this
point of contact, called the alveolo-capillary junction,
Prognosis
will allow blood and tissue fluid to leak into the alveoli,
Prognosis for childhood and neonatal ALD patients
eventually filling them so that air cannot enter. The result
is poor because of the progressive myelin degeneration.
is the type of breathing distress called ARDS. ARDS is
Death usually occurs between one and ten years after
one of the major causes of excess fluid in the lungs,the
onset of symptoms.
other being heart failure.
Along with fluid there is a marked increase in
Prevention
inflamed cells in the lungs. There also is debris left over
Since ALD is a genetic disease,prevention is largely from damaged lung cells,and fibrin,a semi-solid materi-
limited to genetic counseling and fetal monitoring al derived from blood in the tissues. Typically these
through amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. materials join together with large molecules in the blood
(proteins), to form hyaline membranes. (These mem-
Resources branes are very prominent in premature infants who
BOOKS develop respiratory distress syndrome; it is often called
Berkow,Robert. Merck Manual of Medical Information.White- hyaline membrane disease.) If ARDS is very severe or
house Station,NJ:Merck Research Laboratories,1997. lasts a long time,the lungs do not heal,but rather become
scarred,a process known as fibrosis. The lack of a nor-
John T. Lohr,PhD
mal amount of oxygen causes the blood vessels of the
lung to become narrower, and in time they, too, may
Adrenomyeloneuropathy see Adrenoleuko-
become scarred and filled with clotted blood. The lungs
dystrophy
as a whole become very “stiff,” and it becomes much
harder for the patient to breathe.
Causes and symptoms
Adult respiratory distress A very wide range of diseases or toxic substances,
syndrome including some drugs,can cause ARDS. They include:
•Breathing in (aspiration) of the stomach contents when
Definition
regurgitated, or salt water or fresh water from nearly
Adult respiratory distress syndrome(ARDS),also drowning.
called acute respiratory distress syndrome,is a type of
•Inhaling smoke,as in a fire; toxic materials in the air,
lung (pulmonary) failure that may result from any dis-
such as ammonia or hydrocarbons; or too much oxy-
ease that causes large amounts of fluid to collect in the
gen,which itself can injure the lungs.
lungs. ARDS is not itself a specific disease, but a syn-
drome,a group of symptoms and signs that make up one •Infection by a virus or bacterium, or sepsis, a wide-
of the most important forms of lung or respiratory fail- spread infection that gets into the blood.
ure. It can develop quite suddenly in persons whose
•Massive trauma,with severe injury to any part of the
lungs have been perfectly normal. Very often ARDS is a
body.
true medical emergency. The basic fault is a breakdown
•Shock with persistently low blood pressure may not in
of the barrier, or membrane, that normally keeps fluid
itself cause ARDS,but it can be an important factor.
from leaking out of the small blood vessels of the lung
into the breathing sacs (the alveoli). •A blood clotting disorder called disseminated intravas-
cular coagulation,in which blood clots form in vessels
throughout the body,including the lungs.
Description
•A large amount of fat entering the circulation and trav-
Another name for ARDS is shock lung. Its formal
eling to the lungs,where it lodges in small blood ves-
name is misleading,because children,as well as adults,
sels,injuring the cells lining the vessel walls.
may be affected. In the lungs the smallest blood vessels,
or capillaries,make contact with the alveoli,tiny air sacs •An overdose of a narcotic drug,a sedative,or,rarely,
at the tips of the smallest breathing tubes (the bronchi). aspirin.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 67
Adult
respiratory
distress
syndrome
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 67
into a vein and advance it into the main artery of the lung.
KEY TERMS In this way,the pressure within the pulmonary capillaries
can be measured. Pressure within the pulmonary capillar-
Alveoli—The tiny air sacs at the ends of the breath- ies is elevated in heart failure,but normal in ARDS.
ing tubes of the lung where oxygen normally is
taken up by the capillaries to enter the circulation. Treatment
Aspiration—The process in which solid food, liq- The three main goals in treating patients with ARDS
uids, or secretions that normally are swallowed are:
are, instead, breathed into the lungs.
•To treat whatever injury or disease has caused ARDS.
Capillaries—The smallest arteries which, in the Examples are:to treat septic infection with the proper
lung, are located next to the alveoli so that they antibiotics,and to reduce the level of oxygen therapy if
can pick up oxygen from inhaled air. ARDS has resulted from a toxic level of oxygen.
Face mask—The simplest way of delivering a high •To control the process in the lungs that allows fluid to
level of oxygen to patients with ARDS or other leak out of the blood vessels. At present there is no cer-
low-oxygen conditions. tain way to achieve this. Certain steroid hormones have
been tried because they can combat inflammation,but
Steroids—A class of drugs resembling normal
the actual results have been disappointing.
body substances that often help control inflamma-
tion in the body tissues. •To make sure the patient gets enough oxygen until the
lung injury has had time to heal. If oxygen delivered by
Ventilator—A mechanical device that can take
a face mask is not enough, the patient is placed on a
over the work of breathing for a patient whose
ventilator,which takes over breathing,and,through a
lungs are injured or are starting to heal.
tube placed in the nose or mouth (or an incision in the
windpipe),forces oxygen into the lungs. This treatment
must be closely supervised,and the pressure adjusted
so that too much oxygen is not delivered.
•Inflammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis), when
blood proteins,called enzymes,pass to the lungs and Patients with ARDS should be cared for in an inten-
injure lung cells. sive care unit, where experienced staff and all needed
equipment are available. Enough fluid must be provided,
•Severe burn injury.
by vein if necessary,to prevent dehydration. Also,the
•Injury of the brain,or bleeding into the brain,from any patient’s nutritional state must be maintained,again by
cause may be a factor in ARDS for reasons that are not vein,if oral intake is not sufficient.
clear. Convulsions also may cause some cases.
Usually ARDS develops within one to two days of the Prognosis
original illness or injury. The person begins to take rapid
If the patient’s lung injury does not soon begin to
but shallow breaths. The doctor who listens to the patient’s
heal,the lack of sufficient oxygen can injure other organs,
chest with a stethoscope may hear “crackling”or wheez-
such as the kidneys. There always is a risk that bacterial
ingsounds. The low blood oxygen content may cause the
pneumoniawill develop at some point. Without prompt
skin to appear mottled or even blue. As fluid continues to
treatment,as many as 90% of patients with ARDS can be
fill the breathing sacs,the patient may have great trouble
expected to die. With modern treatment,however,about
breathing,take very rapid breaths,and gasp for air.
half of all patients will survive. Those who do live usually
recover completely,with little or no long-term breathing
Diagnosis difficulty. Lung scarring is a risk after a long period on a
ventilator, but it may improve in the months after the
A simple test using a device applied to the ear will
patient is taken off ventilation. Whether a particular
show whether the blood is carrying too little oxygen,and
patient will recover depends to a great extent on whether
this can be confirmed by analyzing blood taken from an
the primary disease that caused ARDS to develop in the
artery. The chest x raymay be normal in the early stages,
first place can be effectively treated.
but,in a short time,fluid will be seen where it does not
belong. The two lungs are about equally affected. A heart
Prevention
of normal size indicates that the problem actually is ARDS
and not heart failure. Another way a physician can distin- The only way to prevent ARDS is to avoid those dis-
guish between these two possibilities is to place a catheter eases and harmful conditions that damage the lung. For
68 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
emordnys
ssertsid
yrotaripser
tludA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 68
instance,the danger of aspirating stomach contents into the latter half of life,an individual is more prone to have
the lungs can be avoided by making sure a patient does not problems with the various functions of the body and to
eat shortly before receiving general anesthesia. If a patient develop any number of chronic or fatal diseases. The car-
needs oxygen therapy,as low a level as possible should be diovascular, digestive, excretory, nervous, reproductive
given. Any form of lung infection,or infection anywhere and urinary systems are particularly affected. The most
in the body that gets into the blood, must be treated common diseases of aging include Alzheimer’s,arthritis,
promptly to avoid the lung injury that causes ARDS. cancer,diabetes,depression,and heart disease.
Resources Description
BOOKS
Human beings reach a peak of growth and develop-
Smolley,Lawrence A.,and Debra F. Bryse. Breathe Right
ment around the time of their mid 20s. Aging is the normal
Now:A Comprehensive Guide to Understanding and
transition time after that flurry of activity. Although there
Treating the Most Common Breathing Disorders.New
are quite a few age-related changes that tax the body,dis-
York:W. W. Norton & Co.,1998.
ability is not necessarily a part of aging. Health and
ORGANIZATIONS lifestyle factors together with the genetic makeup of the
National Heart,Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105, individual,and determines the response to these changes.
Bethesda,MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http:// Body functions that are most often affected by age include:
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
National Respiratory Distress Syndrome Foundation. P.O. Box •Hearing, which declines especially in relation to the
723,Montgomeryville,PA 18936. highest pitched tones.
•The proportion of fat to muscle,which may increase by
OTHER
as much as 30%. Typically,the total padding of body
“Pulmonary Medicine.”HealthWeb.com. 5 Jan. 1998. <http://
healthweb.org>. fat directly under the skin thins out and accumulates
around the stomach. The ability to excrete fats is
David A. Cramer,MD impaired, and therefore the storage of fats increases,
including cholesterol and fat-soluble nutrients.
AFP test see Alpha-fetoprotein test
•The amount of water in the body decreases,which there-
African American health see Minority fore decreases the absorption of water-soluble nutrients.
Also,there is less saliva and other lubricating fluids.
health
•The liver and the kidneys cannot function as efficiently,
African sleeping sickness see Sleeping
thus affecting the elimination of wastes.
sickness
•A decrease in the ease of digestion,with a decrease in
African trypanosomiasis see Sleeping
stomach acid production.
sickness
•A loss of muscle strength and coordination, with an
Agammaglobulinemia see Common accompanying loss of mobility,agility,and flexibility.
variable immunodeficiency •A decline in sexual hormones and sexual functioning.
Aggression see Conduct disorder •A decrease in the sensations of taste and smell.
•Changes in the cardiovascular and respiratory systems,
leading to decreased oxygen and nutrients throughout
the body.
•Decreased functioning of the nervous system so that
Aging nerve impulses are not transmitted as efficiently,reflex-
es are not as sharp, and memory and learning are
Definition
diminished.
Starting at what is commonly called middle age,oper- •A decrease in bone strength and density.
ations of the human body begin to be more vulnerable to
•Hormone levels,which gradually decline. The thyroid
daily wear and tear; there is a general decline in physical,
and sexual hormones are particularly affected.
and possibly mental,functioning. In the Western countries,
the length of life is often into the 70s. The upward limit of •Declining visual abilities. Age-related changes may
the life span,however,can be as high as 120 years. During lead to diseases such as macular degeneration.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 69
Aging
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 69
•A compromised ability to produce vitamin D from sun- •failure to thrive
light.
•urinary incontinence
•A reduction in protein formation leading to shrinkage
•dizziness
in muscle mass and decreased bone formation,possibly
leading to osteoporosis. •weight loss
•falling
Causes and symptoms
Treatment
There are several theories as to why the aging body
loses functioning. It may be that several factors work For the most part,doctors prescribe medications to
together or that one particular factor is at work more than control the symptoms and diseases of aging. In the Unit-
others in a given individual. ed States, about two-thirds of people 65 and over take
•Programmed senescence, or aging clock, theory. The medications for various complaints. More women than
aging of the cells of each individual is programmed into men use these medications. The most common drugs
the genes,and there is a preset number of possible reju- used by the elderly are painkillers, diuretics or water
venations in the life of a given cell. When cells die at a pills, sedatives, cardiac drugs, antibiotics, and mental
rate faster than they are replaced,organs do not func- health drugs.
tion properly,and they are soon unable to maintain the Estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) is commonly
functions necessary for life. prescribed to postmenopausal women for symptoms of
•Genetic theory. Human cells maintain their own seed of aging. It is often used in conjunction with progesterone.
destruction at the level of the chromosomes. ERT functions to help keep bones strong,reduce risk of
heart disease,restore vaginal lubrication,and to improve
•Connective tissue,or cross-linking theory. Changes in
skin elasticity. Evidence suggests that it may also help
the make-up of the connective tissue alter the stability
maintain mental functions.
of body structures,causing a loss of elasticity and func-
tioning,and leading to symptoms of aging.
Expected results
•Free-radical theory. The most commonly held theory of
aging, it is based on the fact that ongoing chemical Aging is unavoidable, but major physical impair-
reactions of the cells produce free radicals. In the pres- ment is not. People can lead a healthy,disability-free life
ence of oxygen,these free radicals cause the cells of the well through their later years. A well established support
body to break down. As time goes on,more cells die or system of family, friends, and health care providers,
lose the ability to function,and the body soon ceases to together with focus on good nutrition and lifestyle
function as a whole. habits and good stressmanagement,can prevent disease
•Immunological theory. There are changes in the immune and lessen the impact of chronic conditions.
system as it begins to wear out, and the body is more
prone to infections and tissue damage,which may finally
Alternative treatment
cause death. Also,as the system breaks down,the body
is more apt to have autoimmune reactions,in which the Nutritional supplements
body’s own cells are mistaken for foreign material and
Consumption of a high–quality multivitamin is rec-
are destroyed or damaged by the immune system.
ommended. Common nutritional deficiencies connected
with aging include B vitamins,vitamins A and C,folic
Diagnosis acid, calcium, magnesium, zinc, iron, chromium, and
trace minerals. Since stomach acids may be decreased,it
Many problems can arise due to age-related changes
is suggested that the use of a powdered multivitamin for-
in the body. Although there is no one test to be given,a
mula in gelatin capsules be used,as this form is the easi-
thorough physical exam and a basic blood screening and
est to digest. Such formulas may also contain enzymes
blood chemistry panel can point to areas in need of fur-
for further help with digestion.
ther attention. When older people become ill, the first
signs of disease are often nonspecific. Further exams Antioxidants can help to neutralize damage by the
should be conducted if any of the following occur: free radical actions thought to contribute to problems of
aging. They are also helpful in preventing and treating
•diminished or lack of desire for food
cancer and in treating cataractsand glaucoma. Supple-
•increasing confusion ments that serve as antioxidants include:
70 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
gnigA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 70
•Vitamin E, 400–1,000 IUs daily. Protects cell mem-
branes against damage. It shows promise in prevention KEY TERMS
against heart disease,and Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s
diseases. Antioxidants—Substances that reduce the damage
•Selenium,50 mg taken twice daily. Research suggests of the highly reactive free radicals that are the
that selenium may play a role in reducing the risk of byproducts of the cells.
cancer. Alzheimer’s disease—A condition causing a
•Beta-carotene,25,000–40,000 IUs daily. May help in decline in brain function that interferes with the
treating cancer, colds and flu, arthritis, and immune ability to reason and to perform daily activities.
support. Senescence—Aging.
•Vitamin C,1,000–2,000 mg per day. It may cause diar- Vata—One of the three main constitutional types
rheain large doses. If this occurs,however,all that is found under Ayurvedic principles. Keeping one’s
needed is a decrease in the dosage. particular constitution in balance is considered
important in maintaining health.
Other supplements that are helpful in treating age-
related problems including:
•B /B-complex vitamins,studies show that B may help
12 12
reduce mental symptoms,such as confusion,memory
believed to be helpful in treating problems related to
loss,and depression.
stress. Siberian ginseng also increases mental and physi-
•Coenzyme Q10 may be helpful in treating heart dis- cal performance,and may be useful in treating memory
ease,as up to three-quarters cardiac patients have been loss,chronic fatigue,and immune dysfunction.
found to be lacking in this heart enzyme.
Ginkgo bilobaworks particularly well on the brain
and nervous system. It is effective in reducing the symp-
Hormones
toms of conditions, such as Alzheimer’s, depression,
The following hormone supplements may be taken visual problems, and problems of blood circulation. It
to prevent or to treat various age-related problems. How- may also help treat heart disease, strokes, dementia,
ever,caution should be taken before beginning treatment, Raynaud’s disease,head injuries,leg cramps,macular
and the patient should consult his or her health care pro- degeneration, tinnitus, impotence due to poor blood
fessional. flow,and diabetes-related nerve damage.
DHEA improves brain functioning and serves as a Proanthocyanidins,or PCO,are Pycnogenol,derived
building block for many other important hormones in the from grape seeds and skin,and from pine tree bark,and
body. It may be helpful in restoring declining hormone may help in the prevention of cancer and poor vision.
levels and in building up muscle mass,strengthening the
In Ayurvedic medicine, aging is described as a
bones,and maintaining a healthy heart.
process of increased vata,in which there is a tendency to
Melatonin may be helpful for insomnia. It has also become thinner,drier,more nervous,more restless,and
been used to help fight viruses and bacterial infections, more fearful,while having a loss of appetite as well as
reduce the risk of heart disease,improve sexual function- sleep. Bananas, almonds, avocados, and coconuts are
ing,and to protect against cancer. some of the foods used in correcting such conditions.
One of the main herbs used for such conditions is gotu
Human growth hormone (hGH) has been shown to
kola (Centella asiatica),which is used to revitalize the
regulate blood sugar levels and to stimulate bone,carti-
nervous system and brain cells and to fortify the immune
lage,and muscle growth while reducing fat.
system. Gotu kola is also used to treat memory loss,anx-
iety,and insomnia.
Herbs
In Chinese medicine,most symptoms of aging are
Garlic (Allium sativa) is helpful in preventing heart
regarded as symptoms of a yin deficiency. Moistening
disease, as well as improving the tone and texture of
foods such as millet, barley soup, tofu, mung beans,
skin. Garlic stimulates liver and digestive system func-
wheat germ, spirulina, potatoes, black sesame seeds,
tions, and also helps in dealing with heart disease and
walnuts, and flax seeds are recommended. Jing tonics
high blood pressure.
may also be used. These include deer antler, dodder
Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus) sup- seeds, processed rehmannia, longevity soup, mussels,
ports the adrenal glands and immune functions. It is and chicken.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 71
Aging
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 71
Prevention “To a Long and Healthy Life.”<http://www.healthy.net/
hwlibraryarticles/aesoph/longandhealthy.htm/> (Decem-
Preventive health practices such as healthy diet, ber 28,2000).
daily exercise, stress management, and control of
lifestyle habits such as smoking and drinking, can Patience Paradox
lengthen the life span and improve the quality of life as
people age. Exercise can improve the appetite,the health
of the bones,the emotional and mental outlook,and the
digestion and circulation.
Drinking plenty of fluids aids in maintaining healthy Agoraphobia
skin,good digestion,and proper elimination of wastes.
Definition
Up to eight glasses of water should be consumed daily,
along with plenty of herbal teas, diluted fruit and veg- The word agoraphobia is derived from Greek words
etable juices,and fresh fruits and vegetables with high literally meaning “fear of the marketplace.”The term is
water content. used to describe an irrational and often disabling fear of
Because of a decrease in the sense of taste, older being out in public.
people often increase their intake of salt,which can con-
tribute to high blood pressure and nutrient loss. Use of Description
sugar is also increased. Seaweeds and small amounts of
Agoraphobia is just one type of phobia,or irrational
honey can be used as replacements.
fear. People with phobiasfeel dread or panic when they
Alcohol, nicotine, and caffeine all have potential face certain objects,situations,or activities. People with
damaging effects,and should be limited or completely agoraphobia frequently also experience panic attacks,but
eliminated from consumption. panic attacks,or panic disorder,are not a requirement
for a diagnosis of agoraphobia. The defining feature of
A diet high in fiber and low in fat is recommended.
agoraphobia is anxietyabout being in places from which
Processed foods should be replaced by complex carbohy-
escape might be embarrasing or difficult, or in which
drates,such as whole grains. If chewing becomes a prob-
help might be unavailable. The person suffering from
lem,there should be an increased intake of protein drinks,
agoraphobia usually avoids the anxiety-provoking situa-
freshly juiced fruits and vegetables,and creamed cereals.
tion and may become totally housebound.
Resources
Causes and symptoms
BOOKS Agoraphobia is the most common type of phobia,and
Darden Ph.D.,Ellington. Living Longer Stronger.New York:A
it is estimated to affect between 5-12% of Americans within
Perigee Book,The Berkeley Publishing Group,1995.
their lifetime. Agoraphobia is twice as common in women
Pitchford,Paul. Healing with Whole Foods.Berkeley,CA:
as in men and usually strikes between the ages of 15-35.
North Atlantic Books,1993.
The symptoms of the panic attacks which may
OTHER accompany agoraphobia vary from person to person,and
“Anti-Aging-Nutritional Program.”<http://www.healthy.net/ may include trembling,sweating,heart palpitations(a
hwlibrarybooks/haas/perform/antiagin.htm/> (December
feeling of the heart pounding against the chest),jitters,
28,2000).
fatigue, tingling in the hands and feet, nausea, a rapid
“Effects of Hormone in the Body.”<http://www.anti-aging.org/
pulse or breathing rate,and a sense of impending doom.
Effects_hGH.html/> (December 28,2000).
“The Elderly-Nutritional Programs.” Agoraphobia and other phobias are thought to be the
<http://www.healthy.net/hwlibrarybooks/haas/lifestage/ result of a number of physical and environmental factors.
elderly.htm/> (December 28,2000). For instance,they have been associated with biochemical
“Evaluating the Elderly Patient:the Case for Assessment Tech- imbalances,especially related to certain neurotransmit-
nology.”<http://text.nlm.nih.gov/nih/ta/www/01.html/>
ters (chemical nerve messengers) in the brain. People
(December 28,2000).
who have a panic attack in a given situation (e.g.,a shop-
“Herbal Phytotherapy and the Elderly.”<http://www.healthy.
ping mall) may begin to associate the panic with that sit-
net/hwlibrarybooks/hoffman/elders/elders.htm/> (Decem-
uation and learn to avoid it. According to some theories,
ber 28,2000).
irrational anxiety results from unresolved emotional con-
“Pharmacokinetics.”Merck & Co.,Inc. (1995-2000). <http://
www.merck.com/pubs/mmanual/section22/chapter304/ flicts. All of these factors may play a role to varying
304a.htm/> (December 28,2000). extents in different cases of agoraphobia.
72 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
aibohparogA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 72
Diagnosis
KEY TERMS
People who suffer from panic attacks should discuss
the problem with a physician. The doctor can diagnose
the underlying panic or anxiety disorder and make sure Benzodiazepines—A group of tranquilizers often
the symptoms aren’t related to some other underlying used to treat anxiety.
medical condition. Desensitization—A treatment for phobias which
The doctor makes the diagnosis of agoraphobia involves exposing the phobic person to the feared
based primarily on the patient’s description of his or her situation. It is often used in conjunction with
symptoms. The person with agoraphobia experiences relaxation techniques.
anxiety in situations where escape is difficult or help is Phobia—An intense and irrational fear of a specif-
unavailable—or in certain situations,such as being alone. ic object, activity, or situation.
While many people are somewhat apprehensive in these
situations,the hallmark of agoraphobia is that a person’s
active avoidance of the feared situation impairs his or her
ability to work,socialize,or otherwise function. “Panic Disorder—Panic Attacks and Agoraphobia.”American
Family Physician52,no. 7 (15 Nov. 1995):2067-8.
Treatment
ORGANIZATIONS
Treatment for agoraphobia usually consists of both American Psychiatric Association. 1400 K Street NW,Washing-
medication and psychotherapy. Usually, patients can ton DC 20005. (888) 357-7924. <http://www.psych.org>.
benefit from certain antidepressants,such as amitripty- Anxiety Disorders Association of America. 11900 Park Lawn
line (Elavil),or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, Drive,Ste. 100,Rockville,MD 20852. (800) 545-7367.
<http://www.adaa.org>.
such as paroxetine (Paxil),fluoxetine (Prozac),or sertra-
National Institute of Mental Health. Mental Health Public
line (Zoloft). In addition, patients may manage panic
Inquiries,5600 Fishers Lane,Room 15C-05,Rockville,
attacks in progress with certain tranquilizers called ben-
MD 20857. (888) 826-9438. <http://www.nimh.nih.gov>.
zodiazepines, such as alprazolam (Xanax) or clon-
azepam (Klonipin).
Robert Scott Dinsmoor
The mainstay of treatment for agoraphobia and other
phobias is cognitive behavioral therapy. A specific tech- Agranulocytosis see Neutropenia
nique that is often employed is called desensitization.
The patient is gradually exposed to the situation that usu-
ally triggers fear and avoidance, and, with the help of
breathing or relaxation techniques,learns to cope with
the situation. This helps break the mental connection
AIDS
between the situation and the fear, anxiety, or panic.
Patients may also benefit from psychodynamically ori-
Definition
ented psychotherapy, discussing underlying emotional
conflicts with a therapist or support group. Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is an
infectious disease caused by the human immunodeficien-
cyvirus (HIV). It was first recognized in the United States
Prognosis
in 1981. AIDS is the advanced form of infection with the
With proper medication and psychotherapy,90% of HIV virus,which may not cause recognizable disease for a
patients will find significant improvement in their symp- long period after the initial exposure (latency). No vaccine
toms. is currently available to prevent HIV infection. At present,
all forms of AIDS therapy are focused on improving the
Resources
quality and length of life for AIDS patients by slowing or
BOOKS halting the replication of the virus and treating or prevent-
Hallowell,Edward M. Worry:Controlling It and Using It Wise- ing infections and cancers that take advantage of a per-
ly.New York:Pantheon Books,1997. son’s weakened immune system.
PERIODICALS
Forsyth,Sondra. “I Panic When I’m Alone.”Mademoiselle, Description
Apr. 1998,119-24.
Hale,Anthony S. “ABC of Mental Health:Anxiety.”British AIDS is considered one of the most devastating public
Medical Journal314 (28 June 1997):1886-9. health problems in recent history. In June 2000,the Centers
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 73
AIDS
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 73
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported that infection among heterosexuals. The chances of trans-
120,223 (includes only those cases in areas that have confi- mitting the disease to the child are higher in women in
dential HIV reporting) in the United States are HIV-posi- advanced stages of the disease. Breast feeding increases
tive,and 311,701 are living with AIDS (includes only those the risk of transmission by 10-20%. The use of zidovu-
cases where vital status is known). Of these patients,44% dine (AZT) during pregnancy,however,can decrease
are gay or bisexual men,20% are heterosexual intravenous the risk of transmission to the baby.
drug users,and 17% are women. In addition,approximate-
•Exposure to contaminated blood or blood products.
ly 1,000-2,000 children are born each year with HIV infec-
With the introduction of blood product screening in the
tion. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that
mid-1980s,the incidence of HIV transmission in blood
33 million adults and 1.3 million children worldwide were
transfusions has dropped to one in every 100,000 trans-
living with HIV/AIDS as of 1999 with 5.4 million being
fused. With respect to HIV transmission among drug
newly infected that year. Most of these cases are in the
abusers,risk increases with the duration of using injec-
developing countries of Asia and Africa.
tions,the frequency of needle sharing,the number of
persons who share a needle,and the number of AIDS
Risk factors cases in the local population.
AIDS can be transmitted in several ways. The risk •Needle sticks among health care professionals. Present
factors for HIV transmission vary according to category: studies indicate that the risk of HIV transmission by a nee-
dle stick is about one in 250. This rate can be decreased if
•Sexual contact. Persons at greatest risk are those who
the injured worker is given AZT,an anti-retroviral medica-
do not practice safe sex, those who are not monoga-
tion,in combination with other medication.
mous, those who participate in anal intercourse, and
those who have sex with a partner with symptoms of HIV is not transmitted by handshakes or other casu-
advanced HIV infection and/or other sexually trans- al non-sexual contact,coughing or sneezing,or by blood-
mitted diseases (STDs). In the United States and sucking insects such as mosquitoes.
Europe,most cases of sexually transmitted HIV infec-
tion have resulted from homosexual contact,whereas in AIDS in women
Africa,the disease is spread primarily through sexual
AIDS in women is a serious public health concern.
intercourse among heterosexuals.
Women exposed to HIV infection through heterosexual
•Transmission in pregnancy. High-risk mothers include contact are the most rapidly growing risk group in the
women married to bisexual men or men who have an United States population. The percentage of AIDS cases
abnormal blood condition called hemophilia and diagnosed in women has risen from 7% in 1985 to 23% in
require blood transfusions,intravenous drug users,and 1999. Women diagnosed with AIDS may not live as long
women living in neighborhoods with a high rate of HIV as men,although the reasons for this finding are unclear.
74 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
SDIA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 74
Risk of acquiring HIV infection by entry site
Entry site Risk virus reaches entry site Risk virus enters Risk inoculated
Conjuntiva Moderate Moderate Very low
Oral mucosa Moderate Moderate Low
Nasal mucosa Low Low Very low
Lower respiratory Very low Very low Very low
Anus Very high Very high Very high
Skin, intact Very low Very low Very low
Skin, broken Low High High
Sexual:
Vagina Low High High
Penis Low Low High
Ulcers (STD) Medium Low Very high
Blood:
Products High High Low
Shared needles High High High
Accidental needle High Very High Low
Traumatic wound Modest High High
Perinatal High High High
AIDS in children processes: immunodeficiency, autoimmunity, and ner-
vous system dysfunction.
Since AIDS can be transmitted from an infected moth-
er to the child during pregnancy,during the birth process,or Immunodeficiency describes the condition in which
through breast milk,all infants born to HIV-positive moth- the body’s immune response is damaged,weakened,or is
ers are a high-risk group. As of 2000,it was estimated that not functioning properly. In AIDS, immunodeficiency
87% of HIV-positive women are of childbearing age; 41% results from the way that the virus binds to a protein called
of them are drug abusers. Between 15-30% of children born CD4,which is primarily found on the surface of certain
to HIV-positive women will be infected with the virus. subtypes of white blood cells called helper T cells or CD4
cells. After the virus has attached to the CD4 receptor,the
AIDS is one of the 10 leading causes of deathin chil-
virus-CD4 complex refolds to uncover another receptor
dren between one and four years of age. The interval
called a chemokine receptor that helps to mediate entry of
between exposure to HIV and the development of AIDS is
the virus into the cell. One chemokine receptor in particu-
shorter in children than in adults. Infants infected with HIV
lar,CCR5,has gotten recent attention after studies showed
have a 20-30% chance of developing AIDS within a year
that defects in its structure (caused by genetic mutations)
and dying before age three. In the remainder,AIDS pro-
cause the progression of AIDS to be prevented or slowed.
gresses more slowly; the average child patient survives to
Scientists hope that this discovery will lead to the develop-
seven years of age. Some survive into early adolescence.
ment of drugs that trigger an artificial mutation of the
CCR5 gene or target the CCR5 receptor.
Causes and symptoms
Once HIV has entered the cell,it can replicate intra-
Because HIV destroys immune system cells,AIDS cellularly and kill the cell in ways that are still not com-
is a disease that can affect any of the body’s major organ pletely understood. In addition to killing some lympho-
systems. HIV attacks the body through three disease cytes directly,the AIDS virus disrupts the functioning of
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 75
AIDS
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 75
Mature HIV-1 viruses (above) and the lymphocyte from which they emerged (below).Two immature viruses can be seen bud-
ding on the surface of the lymphocyte (right of center).(Photograph by Scott Camazir, Photo Researchers, Inc.Reproduced by
permission.)
the remaining CD4 cells. Because the immune system PERSISTENT GENERALIZED LYMPHADENOPATHY (PGL).
cells are destroyed, many different types of infections Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy,or PGL,is a con-
and cancers that take advantage of a person’s weakened dition in which HIV continues to produce chronic painless
immune system (opportunistic) can develop. swellings in the lymph nodes during the latency period.
The lymph nodes that are most frequently affected by PGL
Autoimmunity is a condition in which the body’s
are those in the areas of the neck,jaw,groin,and armpits.
immune system produces antibodies that work against its
PGL affects between 50-70% of patients during latency.
own cells. Antibodies are specific proteins produced in
response to exposure to a specific,usually foreign,protein CONSTITUTIONAL SYMPTOMS. Many patients will
or particle called an antigen. In this case,the body pro- develop low-grade fevers,chronic fatigue,and general
duces antibodies that bind to blood platelets that are nec- weakness. HIV may also cause a combination of food
essary for proper blood clotting and tissue repair. Once malabsorption,loss of appetite,and increased metabo-
bound,the antibodies mark the platelets for removal from lism that contribute to the so-called AIDS wasting or
the body, and they are filtered out by the spleen. Some wasting syndrome.
AIDS patients develop a disorder,called immune-related
thrombocytopeniapurpura (ITP),in which the number OTHER ORGAN SYSTEMS. At any time during the
course of HIV infection,patients may suffer from a yeast
of blood platelets drops to abnormally low levels.
infection in the mouth called thrush,open sores or ulcers,
As of 2000,researchers do not know precisely how
or other infections of the mouth; diarrheaand other gas-
HIV attacks the nervous system since the virus can cause
trointestinal symptoms that cause malnutrition and
damage without infecting nerve cells directly. One theory
weight loss; diseases of the lungs and kidneys; and
is that,once infected with HIV,one type of immune sys-
degeneration of the nerve fibers in the arms and legs.
tem cell,called a macrophage,begins to release a toxin
HIV infection of the nervous system leads to general loss
that harms the nervous system.
of strength,loss of reflexes,and feelings of numbness or
The course of AIDS generally progresses through burning sensations in the feet or lower legs.
three stages, although not all patients will follow this
progression precisely: Late-stage disease (AIDS)
AIDS is usually marked by a very low number of
Acute retroviral syndrome
CD4+ lymphocytes,followed by a rise in the frequency
Acute retroviral syndrome is a term used to describe of opportunistic infections and cancers. Doctors monitor
a group of symptoms that can resemble mononucleosis the number and proportion of CD4+ lymphocytes in the
and that may be the first sign of HIV infection in 50-70% patient’s blood in order to assess the progression of the
of all patients and 45-90% of women. Most patients are disease and the effectiveness of different medications.
not recognized as infected during this phase and may not About 10% of infected individuals never progress to this
seek medical attention. The symptoms may include overt stage of the disease and are referred to as nonpro-
fever,fatigue,muscle aches,loss of appetite,digestive gressors.
disturbances, weight loss, skin rashes, headache, and
OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS. Once the patient’s
chronically swollen lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy).
CD4+ lymphocyte count falls below 200 cells/mm3,he or
Approximately 25-33% of patients will experience a
she is at risk for a variety of opportunistic infections. The
form of meningitisduring this phase in which the mem-
infectious organisms may include the following:
branes that cover the brain and spinal cord become
inflamed. Acute retroviral syndrome develops between •Fungi. The most common fungal disease associated
one and six weeks after infection and lasts for two to with AIDS is Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia(PCP).
three weeks. Blood tests during this period will indicate PCP is the immediate cause of death in 15-20% of
the presence of virus (viremia) and the appearance of the AIDS patients. It is an important measure of a patient’s
viral p24 antigen in the blood. prognosis. Other fungal infections include a yeast
infection of the mouth (candidiasis or thrush) and
Latency period cryptococcal meningitis.
•Protozoa. Toxoplasmosis is a common opportunistic
After the HIV virus enters a patient’s lymph nodes
infection in AIDS patients that is caused by a proto-
during the acute retroviral syndrome stage, the disease
zoan. Other diseases in this category include isoporiasis
becomes latent for as many as 10 years or more before
and cryptosporidiosis.
symptoms of advanced disease develop. During latency,
the virus continues to replicate in the lymph nodes,where •Mycobacteria. AIDS patients may develop tuberculo-
it may cause one or more of the following conditions: sisor MAC infections. MAC infections are caused by
76 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
SDIA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 76
Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, and occur in intermediate causes. AIDS dementia complex is marked
about 40% of AIDS patients. It is rare until CD4+ by loss of reasoning ability,loss of memory,inability to
counts falls below 50 cells/mm3. concentrate,apathy and loss of initiative,and unsteadi-
ness or weakness in walking. Some patients also develop
•Bacteria. AIDS patients are likely to develop bacterial
seizures. There are no specific treatments for AIDS
infections of the skin and digestive tract.
dementia complex.
•Viruses. AIDS patients are highly vulnerable to
cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), MUSCULOSKELETAL COMPLICATIONS. Patients in
varicella zoster virus (VZV), and Epstein-Barr virus late-stage AIDS may develop inflammations of the mus-
(EBV) infections. Another virus,JC virus, causes pro- cles,particularly in the hip area,and may have arthritis-
gressive destruction of brain tissue in the brain stem,cere- like pains in the joints.
brum,and cerebellum (multifocal leukoencephalopathy
or PML),which is regarded as an AIDS-defining illness ORAL SYMPTOMS. In addition to thrush and painful
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ulcers in the mouth, patients may develop a condition
called hairy leukoplakia of the tongue. This condition is
AIDS DEMENTIA COMPLEX AND NEUROLOGIC COM- also regarded by the CDC as an indicator of AIDS. Hairy
PLICATIONS. AIDS dementiacomplex is usually a late leukoplakia is a white area of diseased tissue on the
complication of the disease. It is unclear whether it is tongue that may be flat or slightly raised. It is caused by
caused by the direct effects of the virus on the brain or by the Epstein-Barr virus.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 77
AIDS
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 77
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISEASE
MUCOCUTANEOUS
PNEUMONIA
SKIN
DIARRHEA
OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS CAUSED BY AIDS
Because the immune system cells are destroyed by the AIDS virus,many different types of infections and cancers can devel-
op,taking advantage of a person’s weakened immune system.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
KEY TERMS
Acute retroviral syndrome—A group of symptoms Hairy leukoplakia of the tongue—A white area of
resembling mononucleosis that often are the first diseased tissue on the tongue that may be flat or
sign of HIV infection in 50-70% of all patients and slightly raised. It is caused by the Epstein-Barr virus
45-90% of women. and is an important diagnostic sign of AIDS.
AIDS dementia complex—A type of brain dysfunc- Hemophilia—Any of several hereditary blood coag-
tion caused by HIV infection that causes difficulty ulation disorders occurring almost exclusively in
thinking, confusion, and loss of muscular coordi- males. Because blood does not clot properly, even
nation. minor injuries can cause significant blood loss that
may require a blood transfusion, with its associated
Antibody—A specific protein produced by the
minor risk of infection.
immune system in response to a specific foreign
protein or particle called an antigen. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)—A transmis-
Antigen—Any substance that stimulates the body to sible retrovirus that causes AIDS in humans. Two
produce antibody. forms of HIV are now recognized: HIV-1, which caus-
es most cases of AIDS in Europe, North and South
Autoimmunity—A condition in which the body’s
America, and most parts of Africa; and HIV-2, which
immune system produces antibodies in response to
is chiefly found in West African patients. HIV-2, dis-
its own tissues or blood components instead of for-
covered in 1986, appears to be less virulent than HIV-
eign particles or microorganisms.
1 and may also have a longer latency period.
CCR5—A chemokine receptor; defects in its struc-
Immunodeficient—A condition in which the body’s
ture caused by genetic mutation cause the progres-
immune response is damaged, weakened, or is not
sion of AIDS to be prevented or slowed.
functioning properly.
CD4—A type of protein molecule in human blood,
Kaposi’s sarcoma—A cancer of the connective tis-
sometimes called the T4 antigen, that is present on
sue that produces painless purplish red (in people
the surface of 65% of immune cells. The HIV virus
with light skin) or brown (in people with dark skin)
infects cells with CD4 surface proteins, and as a
blotches on the skin. It is a major diagnostic marker
result, depletes the number of T cells, B cells, natur-
of AIDS.
al killer cells, and monocytes in the patient’s blood.
Most of the damage to an AIDS patient’s immune Latent period—Also called incubation period, the
system is done by the virus’ destruction of CD4+ time between infection with a disease-causing
lymphocytes. agent and the development of disease.
Chemokine receptor—A receptor on the surface of Lymphocyte—A type of white blood cell that is
some types of immune cells that helps to mediate important in the formation of antibodies and that
entry of HIV into the cell. can be used to monitor the health of AIDS patients.
AIDS-RELATED CANCERS. Patients with late-stage Invasive cancer of the cervix (related to certain types
AIDS may develop Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), a skin of human papilloma virus [HPV]) is an important diag-
tumor that primarily affects homosexual men. KS is the nostic marker of AIDS in women.
most common AIDS-related malignancy. It is character-
ized by reddish-purple blotches or patches (brownish in
Diagnosis
African-Americans) on the skin or in the mouth. About
Because HIV infection produces such a wide range
40% of patients with KS develop symptoms in the diges-
of symptoms,the CDC has drawn up a list of 34 condi-
tive tract or lungs. KS may be caused by a herpes virus-
tions regarded as defining AIDS. The physician will use
like sexually transmitted disease agent rather than HIV.
the CDC list to decide whether the patient falls into one
The second most common form of cancerin AIDS
of these three groups:
patients is a tumor of the lymphatic system (lymphoma).
AIDS-related lymphomas often affect the central nervous •definitive diagnoses with or without laboratory evi-
system and develop very aggressively. dence of HIV infection
78 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
SDIA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 78
KEY TERMS
Lymphoma—A cancerous tumor in the lymphatic Pneumocystis cariniipneumonia (PCP)—An oppor-
system that is associated with a poor prognosis in tunistic infection caused by a fungus that is a major
AIDS patients. cause of death in patients with late-stage AIDS.
Macrophage—A large white blood cell, found pri- Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
marily in the bloodstream and connective tissue, (PML)—A disease caused by a virus that destroys
that helps the body fight off infections by ingesting white matter in localized areas of the brain. It is
the disease-causing organism. HIV can infect and regarded as an AIDS-defining illness.
kill macrophages.
Protease inhibitors—The second major category of
Monocyte—A large white blood cell that is formed drug used to treat AIDS that works by suppressing
in the bone marrow and spleen. About 4% of the the replication of the HIV virus.
white blood cells in normal adults are monocytes.
Protozoan—A single-celled, usually microscopic
Mycobacterium avium(MAC) infection—A type of organism that is eukaryotic and, therefore, different
opportunistic infection that occurs in about 40% of from bacteria (prokaryotic).
AIDS patients and is regarded as an AIDS-defining
disease. Retrovirus—A virus that contains a unique enzyme
called reverse transcriptase that allows it to repli-
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors— cate within new host cells.
The newest class of antiretroviral drugs that work by
inhibiting the reverse transcriptase enzyme neces- T cells—Lymphocytes that originate in the thymus
sary for HIV replication. gland. T cells regulate the immune system’s
response to infections, including HIV. CD4 lympho-
Nucleoside analogues—The first group of effective cytes are a subset of T lymphocytes.
anti-retroviral medications. They work by interfering
with the AIDS virus’ synthesis of DNA. Thrush—A yeast infection of the mouth character-
ized by white patches on the inside of the mouth
Opportunistic infection—An infection by organ- and cheeks.
isms that usually don’t cause infection in people
whose immune systems are working normally. Viremia—The measurable presence of virus in the
bloodstream that is a characteristic of acute retrovi-
Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL)—A ral syndrome.
condition in which HIV continues to produce
chronic painless swellings in the lymph nodes dur- Wasting syndrome—A progressive loss of weight
ing the latency period. and muscle tissue caused by the AIDS virus.
•definitive diagnoses with laboratory evidence of HIV doctor examines the patient,he or she will look for the
infection overall pattern of symptoms rather than any one finding.
•presumptive diagnoses with laboratory evidence of
HIV infection Laboratory tests for HIV infection
BLOOD TESTS (SEROLOGY). The first blood test for
AIDS was developed in 1985. At present,patients who
Physical findings
are being tested for HIV infection are usually given an
Almost all the symptoms of AIDS can occur with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test for the
other diseases. The general physical examinationmay presence of HIV antibody in their blood. Positive ELISA
range from normal findings to symptoms that are closely results are then tested with a Western blot or immunofluo-
associated with AIDS. These symptoms are hairy leuko- rescence (IFA) assay for confirmation. The combination
plakia of the tongue and Kaposi’s sarcoma. When the of the ELISA and Western blot tests is more than 99.9%
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 79
AIDS
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 79
accurate in detecting HIV infection within four to eight PROPHYLACTIC TREATMENT FOR OPPORTUNISTIC
weeks following exposure. The polymerase chain reac- INFECTIONS. Prophylactic treatment is treatment that is
tion (PCR) test can be used to detect the presence of viral given to prevent disease. AIDS patients with a history of
nucleic acids in the very small number of HIV patients Pneumocystispneumonia; with CD4+ counts below 200
who have false-negative results on the ELISA and West- cells/mm3or 14% of lymphocytes; weight loss; or thrush
ern blot tests. These tests are also used to detect viruses should be given prophylactic medications. The three
and bacterium other than HIV and AIDS. drugs given are trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, dap-
sone,or pentamidine in aerosol form.
OTHER LABORATORY TESTS. In addition to diagnos-
tic blood tests,there are other blood tests that are used to ANTI-RETROVIRAL TREATMENT. In recent years
track the course of AIDS in patients that have already researchers have developed drugs that suppress HIV
been diagnosed. These include blood counts,viral load replication, as distinct from treating its effects on the
tests, p24 antigen assays, and measurements of (cid:1)- body. These drugs fall into three classes:
2
microglobulin ((cid:1)M).
2 •Nucleoside analogues. These drugs work by interfering
Doctors will use a wide variety of tests to diagnose the with the action of HIV reverse transcriptase inside infect-
presence of opportunistic infections,cancers,or other dis- ed cells,thus ending the virus’replication process. These
ease conditions in AIDS patients. Tissue biopsies,samples of drugs include zidovudine (sometimes called azidothymi-
cerebrospinal fluid,and sophisticated imaging techniques, dine or AZT),didanosine (ddI),zalcitabine (ddC),stavu-
such as magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) and computed dine (d4T),lamivudine (3TC),and abacavir (ABC).
tomography scans(CT) are used to diagnose AIDS-related
•Protease inhibitors. Protease inhibitors can be effective
cancers,some opportunistic infections,damage to the central
against HIV strains that have developed resistance to
nervous system,and wasting of the muscles. Urine and stool
nucleoside analogues,and are often used in combination
samples are used to diagnose infections caused by parasites.
with them. These compounds include saquinavir,riton-
AIDS patients are also given blood tests for syphilisand
avir,indinavir,nelfinavir,amprenavir,and lopinavir.
other sexually transmitted diseases.
•Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. This is
a new class of antiretroviral agents. Three are available,
Diagnosis in children nevirapine,which was approved first,delavirdine and
efavirin.
Diagnostic blood testing in children older than 18
months is similar to adult testing,with ELISA screening Treatment guidelines for these agents are in constant
confirmed by Western blot. Younger infants can be diag- change as new medications are developed and intro-
nosed by direct culture of the HIV virus, PCR testing, duced. Two principles currently guide doctors in working
and p24 antigen testing. out drug regimens for AIDS patients:using combinations
of drugs rather than one medication alone; and basing
In terms of symptoms,children are less likely than
treatment decisions on the results of the patient’s viral
adults to have an early acute syndrome. They are,howev-
load tests.
er,likely to have delayed growth,a history of frequent
illness,recurrent ear infections,a low blood cell count,
STIMULATION OF BLOOD CELL PRODUCTION.
failure to gain weight,and unexplained fevers. Children Because many patients with AIDS suffer from abnormal-
with AIDS are more likely to develop bacterial infec- ly low levels of both red and white blood cells,they may
tions,inflammation of the lungs,and AIDS-related brain be given medications to stimulate blood cell production.
disorders than are HIV-positive adults. Epoetin alfa (erythropoietin) may be given to anemic
patients. Patients with low white blood cell counts may
be given filgrastim or sargramostim.
Treatment
Treatment for AIDS covers four considerations: Treatment in women
TREATMENT OF OPPORTUNISTIC INFECTIONS AND Treatment of pregnant women with HIV is particu-
MALIGNANCIES. Most AIDS patients require complex larly important in that anti-retroviral therapy has been
long-term treatment with medications for infectious dis- shown to reduce transmission to the infant by 65%.
eases. This treatment is often complicated by the devel-
opment of resistance in the disease organisms. AIDS-
Alternative treatment
related malignancies in the central nervous system are
usually treated with radiation therapy. Cancers else- Alternative treatments for AIDS can be grouped into
where in the body are treated with chemotherapy. two categories:those intended to help the immune sys-
80 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
SDIA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 80
tem and those aimed at pain control. Treatments that •Healthcare professionals must taken all necessary pre-
may enhance the function of the immune system include cautions by wearing gloves and masks when handling
Chinese herbal medicine and western herbal medicine, body fluids and preventing needle-stick injuries.
macrobiotic and other special diets,guided imageryand
•If you suspect that you may have become infected,get
creative visualization,homeopathy,and vitamin therapy.
tested for HIV infection. If treated aggressively early
Pain control therapies include hydrotherapy, reiki,
on,the development of AIDS may be postponed indefi-
acupuncture,meditation,chiropractictreatments,and
nitely. If HIV infection is confirmed,it is also vital to
therapeutic massage. Alternative therapies can also be
let your sexual partners know so that they can be tested
used to help with side effects of the medications used in
and,if necessary,receive medical attention.
the treatment of AIDS.
Resources
Prognosis
BOOKS
At the present time,there is no cure for AIDS.
Early HIV Infection Guideline Panel. Evaluation and Manage-
Treatment stresses aggressive combination drug ment of Early HIV Infection.Rockville,MD:U.S. Depart-
therapy for those patients with access to the expensive ment of Health and Human Services,Agency for Health
medications and who tolerate them adequately. The use Care Policy and Research,1994.
Huber,Jeffrey T. Dictionary of AIDS-Related Terminology.New
of these multi-drug therapies has significantly reduced
York and London:Neal-Schuman Publishers,Inc.,1993.
the numbers of deaths, in this country, resulting from
“Infectious Diseases:Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).”
AIDS. The data is still inconclusive, but the potential
In Neonatology:Management,Procedures,On-Call Prob-
exists to possibly prolong life indefinitely using these
lems,Diseases and Drugs.Ed. Tricia Lacy Gomella,et al.
and other drug therapies to boost the immune system,
Norwalk,CT:Appleton & Lange,1994.
keep the virus from replicating,and ward off opportunis- Katz,Mitchell H.,and Harry Hollander. “HIV Infection.”In
tic infections and malignancies. Current Medical Diagnosis & Treatment.Ed. Lawrence M.
Tierney Jr.,et al. Stamford,CT:Appleton & Lange,1998.
Prognosis after the latency period depends on the
McFarland,Elizabeth J. “Human Immunodeficiency Virus
patient’s specific symptoms and the organ systems
(HIV) Infections:Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
affected by the disease. Patients with AIDS-related lym-
(AIDS).”In Current Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment.Ed.
phomas of the central nervous system die within two to
William W. Hay Jr.,et al. Stamford,CT:Appleton &
three months of diagnosis; those with systemic lym-
Lange,1997.
phomas may survive for eight to ten months. So,Peter,and Livette Johnson. “Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (AIDS).”In Conn’s Current Therapy.Ed. Robert
E. Rakel. Philadelphia:W. B. Saunders Company,1997.
Prevention
As of 2001, there is no vaccine effective against PERIODICALS
AIDS. Several vaccines are currently being investigated, Xiao,X.,L. Wu,T. S. Stantchev,Y. R. Feng,S. Ugolini,H.
however,both to prevent initial HIV infection and as a Chen,Z. Shen,J. L. Riley,C. C. Broder,Q. J. Sattentau,
and D. S. Dimitrov. “Constitutive cell surface association
therapeutic treatment to prevent HIV from progressing to
between CD4 and CCR5.”Proceedings of the National
full-blown AIDS.
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
In the meantime,there are many things that can be (June 1999):7496-7501.
done to prevent the spread of AIDS:
ORGANIZATIONS
•Be monogamous and practice safe sex. Individuals
Gay Men’s Health Crisis,Inc.,129 West 20th Street,New York,
must be instructed in the proper use of condoms and
NY 10011-0022. (212) 807-6655.
urged to practice safe sex. Besides avoiding the risk of
National AIDS Hot Line. (800) 342-AIDS (English). (800) 344-
HIV infection, condoms are successful in preventing SIDA (Spanish). (800) AIDS-TTY (hearing-impaired).
other sexually transmitted diseases and unwanted preg-
nancies. Before engaging in a sexual relationship with OTHER
someone,get tested for HIV infection. “FDA Approved Drugs for HIV Infection and AIDS-Related
Conditions.”HIV/AIDS Treatment Information Service
•Avoid needle sharing among intravenous drug users.
website.January 2001. <http://hivatis.org>.
•Although blood and blood products are carefully moni-
tored, those individuals who are planning to undergo Rebecca J. Frey
major surgery may wish to donate blood ahead of time
to prevent a risk of infection from a blood transfusion. AIDS serology see AIDS tests
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 81
AIDS
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 81
with all blood tests, healthcare professionals should
AIDS tests always wear latex gloves and to avoid being pricked by
the needle used in drawing blood for the tests. Also, it
Definition
may be difficult to get blood from a habitual intravenous
AIDS tests, short for acquired immunodeficiency drug user due to collapsed veins.
syndrome tests, cover a number of different procedures
used in the diagnosis and treatment of HIV patients. These Description
tests are sometimes called AIDS serology tests. Serology
Diagnostic tests
is the branch of immunology that deals with the contents
and characteristics of blood serum. Serum is the clear light Diagnostic blood tests for AIDS are usually given to
yellow part of blood that remains liquid when blood cells persons in high-risk populations who may have been
form a clot. AIDS serology evaluates the presence of exposed to HIV or who have the early symptoms of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in blood AIDS. Most persons infected with HIV will develop a
serum and its effects on each patient’s immune system. detectable level of antibody within three months of infec-
tion. The condition of testing positive for HIV antibody
Purpose in the blood is called seroconversion,and persons who
have become HIV-positive are called seroconverters.
AIDS serology serves several different purposes.
Some AIDS tests are used to diagnose patients or con- It is possible to diagnose HIV infection by isolating
firm a diagnosis; others are used to measure the progres- the virus itself from a blood sample or by demonstrating
sion of the disease or the effectiveness of specific treat- the presence of HIV antigen in the blood. Viral culture,
ment regimens. Some AIDS tests can also be used to however,is expensive,not widely available,and slow—it
screen blood donations for safe use in transfusions. takes 28 days to complete the viral culture test. More
common are blood tests that work by detecting the pres-
In order to understand the different purposes of the
ence of antibodies to the HIV virus. These tests are inex-
blood tests used with AIDS patients, it is helpful to
pensive, widely available, and accurate in detecting
understand how HIV infection affects human blood and
99.9% of AIDS infections when used in combination to
the immune system. HIV is a retrovirus that enters the
screen patients and confirm diagnoses.
blood stream of a new host in the following ways:
•by sexual contact ENZYME-LINKED IMMUNOSORBENT ASSAY (ELISA).
This type of blood test is used to screen blood for trans-
•by contact with infected body fluids (such as blood and
fusions as well as diagnose patients. An ELISA test for
urine)
HIV works by attaching HIV antigens to a plastic well or
•by transmission during pregnancy,or
beads. A sample of the patient’s blood serum is added,
•through transfusionof infected blood products and excess proteins are removed. A second antibody cou-
pled to an enzyme is added, followed by addition of a
A retrovirus is a virus that contains a unique enzyme
substance that will cause the enzyme to react by forming
called reverse transcriptase that allows it to replicate with-
a color. An instrument called a spectrophotometer can
in new host cells. The virus binds to a protein called CD4,
measure the color. The name of the test is derived from
which is found on the surface of certain subtypes of white
the use of the enzyme that is coupled or linked to the sec-
blood cells, including helper T cells, macrophages, and
ond antibody.
monocytes. Once HIV enters the cell,it can replicate and
kill the cell in ways that are still not completely under- The latest generation of ELISA tests are 99.5% sen-
stood. In addition to killing some lymphocytes directly,the sitive to HIV. Occasionally,the ELISA test will be posi-
AIDS virus disrupts the functioning of the remaining CD4 tive for a patient without symptoms of AIDS from a low-
cells. CD4 cells ordinarily produce a substance called risk group. Because this result is likely to be a false-posi-
interleukin-2 (IL-2),which stimulates other cells (T cells tive,the ELISA must be repeated on the same sample of
and B cells) in the human immune system to respond to the patient’s blood. If the second ELISA is positive,the
infections. Without the IL-2,T cells do not reproduce as result should be confirmed by the Western blot test.
they normally would in response to the HIV virus,and B
WESTERN BLOT (IMMUNOBLOT). The Western blot
cells are not stimulated to respond to the infection.
or immunoblot test is used as a reference procedure to
confirm the diagnosis of AIDS. In Western blot testing,
Precautions
HIV antigen is purified by electrophoresis (large protein
In some states such as New York,a signed consent molecules are suspended in a gel and separated from one
form is needed in order to administer an AIDS test. As another by running an electric current through the gel).
82 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stset
SDIA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 82
The HIV antigens are attached by blotting to a nylon or
nitrocellulose filter. The patient’s serum is reacted against
the filter,followed by treatment with developing chemi-
cals that allow HIV antibody to show up as a colored
patch or blot. A commercially produced Western blot test
for HIV-1 is now available. It consists of a prefabricated
strip that is incubated with a sample of the patient’s blood
serum and the developing chemicals. About nine different
HIV-1 proteins can be detected in the blots.
When used in combination with ELISA testing,
Western blot testing is 99.9% specific. It can,however,
yield false negatives in patients with very early HIV
infection and in those infected by HIV-2. In some
patients the Western blot yields indeterminate results.
IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE ASSAY (IFA). This method
is sometimes used to confirm ELISA results instead of
Western blotting. An IFA test detects the presence of
HIV antibody in a sample of the patient’s serum by mix-
ing HIV antigen with a fluorescent chemical,adding the
blood sample,and observing the reaction under a micro-
scope with ultraviolet light.
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION (PCR). This test is In 1999, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
used to evaluate the very small number of AIDS patients
(FDA) approved an HIV home testing kit. The kit contains
with false-negative ELISA and Western blot tests. These
multiple components,including material for specimen col-
patients are sometimes called antibody-negative asympto-
lection,a mailing envelope to send the specimen to a labo-
matic (without symptoms) carriers,because they do not
ratory for analysis,and provides pre- and post-test coun-
have any symptoms of AIDS and there is no detectable
seling. It uses a finger prick process for blood collection.
quantity of antibody in the blood serum. Antibody-nega-
The results are obtained by the purchaser through a toll
tive asymptomatic carriers may be responsible for the
free telephone number using a personal identification
very low ongoing risk of HIV infection transmitted by
number (PIN). Post test counseling is provided over the
blood transfusions. It is estimated that the risk is between
telephone by a licensed counselor. The only kit approved
1 in 10,000 and 1 in 100,000 units of transfused blood.
by the FDA as of 2001 was the Home Access test system.
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test can mea-
Prognostic tests
sure the presence of viral nucleic acids in the patient’s
blood even when there is no detectable antibody to HIV. Blood tests to evaluate patients already diagnosed
This test works by amplifying the presence of HIV nucle- with HIV infection are as important as the diagnostic
ic acids in a blood sample. Numerous copies of a gene are tests. Because AIDS has a long latency period,some per-
made by separating the two strands of DNA containing sons may be infected with the virus for 10 years or longer
the gene segment,marking its location,using DNA poly- before they develop symptoms of AIDS. These patients
merase to make a copy,and then continuously replicating are sometimes called antibody-positive asymptomatic
the copies. It is questionable whether PCR will replace carriers. Prognostic tests also help drug researchers eval-
Western blotting as the method of confirming AIDS diag- uate the usefulness of new medications in treating AIDS.
noses. Although PCR can detect the low number of per-
sons (1%) with HIV infections that have not yet generated BLOOD CELL COUNTS. Doctors can measure the
number or proportion of certain types of cells in an AIDS
an antibody response to the virus, the overwhelming
patient’s blood to see whether and how rapidly the dis-
majority of infected persons will be detected by ELISA
ease is progressing, or whether certain treatments are
screening within one to three months of infection. In
helping the patient. These cell count tests include:
addition,PCR testing is based on present knowledge of
the genetic sequences in HIV. Since the virus is continual- •Complete blood count(CBC). A CBC is a routine analy-
ly generating new variants, PCR testing could yield a sis performed on a sample of blood taken from the
false negative in patients with these new variants. patient’s vein with a needle and vacuum tube. The mea-
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 83
AIDS
tests
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 83
A three-dimensional model of the HIV virus.(Corbis Corpora-
tion (New York).Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Antibody—A protein in the blood that identifies AIDS patients. They can help the doctor determine if
and helps remove disease organisms or their toxins. a patient is in advanced stages of the disease.
Antibodies are secreted by B cells. AIDS diagnostic
Electrophoresis—A method of separating complex
tests work by demonstrating the presence of HIV
protein molecules suspended in a gel by running an
antibody in the patient’s blood.
electric current through the gel.
Antigen—Any substance that stimulates the body to
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)—A
produce antibodies.
diagnostic blood test used to screen patients for
B cell—A type of white blood cell derived from AIDS or other viruses. The patient’s blood is mixed
bone marrow. B cells are sometimes called B lym- with antigen attached to a plastic tube or bead sur-
phocytes. They secrete antibody and have a number face. A sample of the patient’s blood serum is
of other complex functions within the human added, and excess proteins are removed. A second
immune system. antibody coupled to an enzyme is added, followed
by a chemical that will cause a color reaction that
CD4—A type of protein molecule in human blood
can be measured by a special instrument.
that is present on the surface of 65% of human T
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)—A transmis-
cells. CD4 is a receptor for the HIV virus. When the
sible retrovirus that causes AIDS in humans. Two
HIV virus infects cells with CD4 surface proteins, it
forms of HIV are now recognized: HIV-1, which caus-
depletes the number of T cells, B cells, natural killer
es most cases of AIDS in Europe, North and South
cells, and monocytes in the patient’s blood. Most of
America, and most parts of Africa; and HIV-2, which
the damage to an AIDS patient’s immune system is
is chiefly found in West African patients. HIV-2, dis-
done by the virus’ destruction of CD4+ lympho-
covered in 1986, appears to be less virulent than HIV-
cytes. CD4 is sometimes called the T4 antigen.
1, but may also have a longer latency period.
Complete blood count (CBC)—A routine analysis
Immunofluorescent assay (IFA)—A blood test
performed on a sample of blood taken from the
sometimes used to confirm ELISA results instead of
patient’s vein with a needle and vacuum tube. The
using the Western blotting. In an IFA test, HIV anti-
measurements taken in a CBC include a white blood
gen is mixed with a fluorescent compound and then
cell count, a red blood cell count, the red cell distri-
with a sample of the patient’s blood. If HIV antibody
bution width, the hematocrit (ratio of the volume of
is present, the mixture will fluoresce when exam-
the red blood cells to the blood volume), and the
ined under ultraviolet light.
amount of hemoglobin (the blood protein that car-
ries oxygen). CBCs are a routine blood test used for Lymphocyte—A type of white blood cell that is
many medical reasons and are not used only for important in the formation of antibodies. Doctors
surements taken in a CBC include a white blood cell count of an immune response. Because HIV targets CD4+
(WBC),a red blood cell count (RBC),the red cell distribu- lymphocytes,their number in the patient’s blood can
tion width,the hematocrit(ratio of the volume of the red be used to track the course of the infection. This blood
blood cells to the blood volume),and the amount of hemo- cell count is considered the most accurate indicator
globin (the blood protein that carries oxygen). Although for the presence of an opportunistic infection in an
CBCs are used on more than just AIDS patients,they can AIDS patient. The absolute CD4+ lymphocyte count
help the doctor determine if an AIDS patient has an is obtained by multiplying the patient’s white blood
advanced form of the disease. Specific AIDS-related signs cell count (WBC) by the percentage of lymphocytes
in a CBC include a low hematocrit,a sharp decrease in the among the white blood cells, and multiplying the
number of blood platelets,and a low level of a certain type result by the percentage of lymphocytes bearing the
of white blood cell called neutrophils. CD4+ marker. An absolute count below 200-300
CD+4 lymphocytes in 1 cubic millimeter (mm3) of
•Absolute CD4+ lymphocytes. A lymphocyte is a type blood indicates that the patient is vulnerable to some
of white blood cell that is important in the formation opportunistic infections.
84 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stset
SDIA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 84
KEY TERMS
can monitor the health of AIDS patients by measur- Serology—The analysis of the contents and proper-
ing the number or proportion of certain types of ties of blood serum.
lymphocytes in the patient’s blood.
Serum—The part of human blood that remains liq-
Macrophage—A large white blood cell, found pri-
uid when blood cells form a clot. Human blood
marily in the bloodstream and connective tissue,
serum is clear light yellow in color.
that helps the body fight off infections by ingesting
the disease organism. HIV can infect and kill
T cells—Lymphocytes that originate in the thymus
macrophages.
gland. T cells regulate the immune system’s
Monocyte—A large white blood cell that is formed response to infections, including HIV. CD4 lympho-
in the bone marrow and spleen. About 4% of the cytes are a subset of T lymphocytes.
white blood cells in normal adults are monocytes.
Viral load test—A new blood test for monitoring the
Opportunistic infection—An infection that devel-
speed of HIV replication in AIDS patients. The viral
ops only when a person’s immune system is weak-
load test is based on PCR techniques and supple-
ened, as happens to AIDS patients.
ments the CD4+ cell count tests.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)—A test performed
to evaluate false-negative results to the ELISA and Western blot—A technique developed in 1979 that
Western blot tests. In PCR testing, numerous copies is used to confirm ELISA results. HIV antigen is puri-
of a gene are made by separating the two strands of fied by electrophoresis and attached by blotting to a
DNA containing the gene segment, marking its nylon or nitrocellulose filter. The patient’s serum is
location, using DNA polymerase to make a copy, reacted against the filter, followed by treatment with
and then continuously replicating the copies. The developing chemicals that allow HIV antibody to
amplification of gene sequences that are associated show up as a colored patch or blot. If the patient is
with HIV allows for detection of the virus by this HIV-positive, there will be stripes at specific loca-
method. tions for two or more viral proteins. A negative
result is blank.
Retrovirus—A virus that contains a unique enzyme
called reverse transcriptase that allows it to repli-
WBC differential—A white blood cell count in
cate within new host cells.
which the technician classifies the different white
Seroconversion—The change from HIV- negative to blood cells by type as well as calculating the num-
HIV-positive status during blood testing. Persons ber of each type. A WBC differential is necessary to
who are HIV-positive are called seroconverters. calculate the absolute CD4+ lymphocyte count.
•CD4+ lymphocyte percentage. Some doctors think that •CD4+ count between 200-600 cells/mm3:Every three
this is a more accurate test than the absolute count months.
because the percentage does not depend on a manual
•CD4+ count less than 200 cells/mm3:Every three months.
calculation of the number of types of different white
blood cells. A white blood cell count that is broken When the CD4+ count falls below 200 cells/mm3,
down into categories in this way is called a WBC dif-
the doctor will put the patient on a medication regimen to
ferential.
protect him or her against opportunistic infections.
It is important for doctors treating AIDS patients to
HIV VIRAL LOAD TESTS. Another type of blood test
measure the lymphocyte count on a regular basis.
for monitoring AIDS patients is the viral load test. It sup-
Experts consulted by the United States Public Health
plements the CD4+ count,which can tell the doctor the
Service recommend the following frequency of serum
extent of the patient’s loss of immune function,but not
testing based on the patient’s CD4+ level:
the speed of HIV replication in the body. The viral load
•CD4+ count more than 600 cells/mm3:Every six months. test is based on PCR techniques and can measure the
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 85
AIDS
tests
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 85
number of copies of HIV nucleic acids. Successive test AIDS serology in children
results for a given patient’s viral load are calculated on a
Children born to HIV-infected mothers may acquire
base 10 logarithmic scale.
the infection through the mother’s placenta or during the
BETA-MICROGLOBULIN ( (cid:1) M). Beta-microglobulin birth process. Public health experts recommend the test-
2 2 2 ing and monitoring of all children born to mothers with
is a protein found on the surface of all human cells with
HIV. Diagnostic testing in children older than 18 months
a nucleus. It is released into the blood when a cell dies.
Although rising blood levels of (cid:1)M are found in is similar to adult testing, with ELISA screening con-
2
firmed by Western blot. Younger infants can be diagnosed
patients with cancerand other serious diseases,a rising
(cid:1)M blood level can be used to measure the progression by direct culture of the HIV virus,PCR testing,and p24
2
antigen testing. These techniques allow a pediatrician to
of AIDS.
identify 50% of infected children at or near birth, and
P24 ANTIGEN CAPTURE ASSAY. Found in the viral 95% of cases in infants three to six months of age.
core of HIV, p24 is a protein that can be measured by
the ELISA technique. Doctors can use p24 assays to
Preparation
measure the antiviral activity of the patient’s medica-
tions. In addition,the p24 assay is sometimes useful in Preparation and aftercare are important parts of AIDS
detecting HIV infection before seroconversion. Howev- diagnostic testing. Doctors are now advised to take the
er,p24 is consistently present in only 25% of persons patient’s emotional,social,economic,and other circum-
infected with HIV. stances into account and to provide counseling before and
after testing. Patients are generally better able to cope with
GENOTYPIC DRUG RESISTANCE TEST. Genotypic the results if the doctor has spent some time with them
testing can help determine whether specific gene muta- before the blood test explaining the basic facts about HIV
tions, common in people with HIV, are causing drug infection and testing. Many doctors now offer this type of
resistance and drug failure. The test looks for specific informational counseling before performing the tests.
genetic mutations of within the virus that are known to
cause resistance to certain drugs used in HIV treatment.
Aftercare
For example the drug 3TC, also known as lamivudine
(Epivir),is not effective against strains of HIV that have If the test results indicate that the patient is HIV- pos-
a mutation at a particular position on the reverse tran- itive,he or she will need counseling,information,referral
scriptase protein—amino acid 184—known as M184V for treatment,and support. Doctors can either counsel the
(M(cid:1)V,methionine to valine). So if the genotypic resis- patient themselves or invite an experienced HIV coun-
tance test shows a mutation at position M184V,it is like- selor to discuss the results of the blood tests with the
ly that person is resistant to 3TC and not likely to patient. They will also assess the patient’s emotional and
respond to 3TC treatment. Genotypic tests are only psychological status,including the possibility of violent
effective if the person is already taking antiviral medica- behavior and the availability of a support network.
tion and if the viral load is greater than 1,000 copies per
milliliter (mL) of blood. The cost of the test, usually
Risks
between $300 and $500, is usually now covered by
The risks of AIDS testing are primarily related to
many insurance plans.
disclosure of the patient’s HIV status rather than to any
PHENOTYPIC DRUG RESISTANCE TESTING. Pheno- physical risks connected with blood testing. Some
typic testing directly measures the sensitivity of a patients are better prepared to cope with a positive diag-
patient’s HIV to particular drugs and drug combinations. nosis than others, depending on their age, sex, health,
To do this, it measures the concentration of a drug resources,belief system,and similar factors.
required to inhibit viral replication in the test tube. This
is the same method used by researchers to determine
Normal results
whether a drug might be effective against HIV before
using it in human clinical trials. Phenotypic testing is a Normal results for ELISA,Western blot, IFA, and
more direct measurement of resistance than genotypic PCR testing are negative for HIV antibody.
testing. Also,unlike genotypic testing,phenotypic test- Normal results for blood cell counts:
ing does not require a high viral load but it is recom-
•WBC differential: Total lymphocytes 24-44% of the
mended that persons already be taking antiretroviral
white blood cells.
drugs. The cost is between $700 and $900 and is now
covered by many insurance plans. •Hematocrit:40-54% in men; 37-47% in women.
86 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
stset
SDIA
GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 86
